                                                     Trace anomaly driven inflation
                                                          S.W. Hawking∗, T. Hertog†,
                                         DAMTP, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, University of Cambridge
                                            Wilberforce Road, Cambridge CB3 0WA, United Kingdom
                                                                     and
                                                                 H.S. Reall‡
arXiv:hep-th/0010232v4 26 Jan 2001




                                            Physics Department, Queen Mary and Westfield College,
                                               Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom

                                                         Preprint DAMTP-2000-92, QMW-PH/00-10
                                                                            25 October 2000


                                                                                  Abstract
                                             This paper investigates Starobinsky’s model of inflation driven by the trace anomaly
                                         of conformally coupled matter fields. This model does not suffer from the problem of
                                         contrived initial conditions that occurs in most models of inflation driven by a scalar field.
                                         The universe can be nucleated semi-classically by a cosmological instanton that is much
                                         larger than the Planck scale provided there are sufficiently many matter fields. There are
                                         two cosmological instantons: the four sphere and a new “double bubble” solution. This
                                         paper considers a universe nucleated by the four sphere. The AdS/CFT correspondence is
                                         used to calculate the correlation function for scalar and tensor metric perturbations during
                                         the ensuing de Sitter phase. The analytic structure of the scalar and tensor propagators is
                                         discussed in detail. Observational constraints on the model are discussed. Quantum loops
                                         of matter fields are shown to strongly suppress short scale metric perturbations, which
                                         implies that short distance modifications of gravity would probably not be observable in the
                                         cosmic microwave background. This is probably true for any model of inflation provided
                                         there are sufficiently many matter fields. This point is illustrated by a comparison of
                                         anomaly driven inflation in four dimensions and in a Randall-Sundrum brane-world model.

                                     ∗
                                       email: S.W.Hawking@damtp.cam.ac.uk
                                     †
                                       email: T.Hertog@damtp.cam.ac.uk
                                     ‡
                                       email: H.S.Reall@qmw.ac.uk




                                                                                       1
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                    3

2 O(4) Instantons                                                                                 6
  2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
  2.2 The trace anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7
  2.3 Energy conservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
  2.4 Shape of the instanton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      9
  2.5 Analytic continuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    11

3 Metric perturbations                                                                           11
  3.1 Scalars, vectors and tensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11
  3.2 Matter effective action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    12
  3.3 Solving the Einstein equations: scalars and vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        15
  3.4 Tensor perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
  3.5 The gravitational action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
  3.6 Metric correlation functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21

4 Analytic structure of propagators                                                              22
  4.1 Flat space limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
  4.2 Scalar propagator on the sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23
  4.3 Tensor propagator on the sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
  4.4 Complex poles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    26

5 Lorentzian two-point correlators                                                               27
  5.1 Scalar propagator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    27
  5.2 Tensor propagator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28

6 Observational constraints                                                                      29
  6.1 Duration of inflation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    29
  6.2 Amplitude of perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31

7 Short distance physics                                                                         32
  7.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
  7.2 Randall-Sundrum model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        33
  7.3 Brane-world perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      34

8 Conclusions                                                                                    37




                                                 2
1    Introduction
Inflation [1] in the very early universe seems the only natural explanation of many observed
features of our universe, in particular the recent measurements of a Doppler peak in the cosmic
microwave background fluctuations [2]. However, while it provides an appealing explanation for
several cosmological problems, it provokes the natural question of why the conditions were such
as to start inflation in the first place.
    The new inflationary scenario [3, 4] was proposed primarily to overcome the problem of
obtaining a natural exit from the inflationary era. In this model, the value of the scalar is
supposed to be initially confined to zero by thermal effects. As the universe expands and cools
these effects disappear, leaving the scalar field miraculously exposed on a mountain peak of the
potential. If the low temperature potential is sufficiently flat near φ = 0 then slow roll inflation
will occur, ending when the field reaches its true minimum φc . This scenario seems implausible
because a high temperature would confine only the average or expectation value of the scalar to
zero. Rather than be supercooled to a state with φ ∼ 0 locally, the field fluctuates and rapidly
forms domains with φ near ±φc The dynamics of the phase transition is governed by the growth
and coalescence of these domains and not by a classical roll down of the spatially averaged field
φ [5]. Because this and other problems, new inflation was largely abandoned in favor of chaotic
inflation [6] in which it is just assumed that that the scalar field was initially displaced from
the minimum of the potential. One attempt to explain these initial conditions for inflation in
terms of quantum fluctuations of the scalar field seems to lead to eternal inflation at the Planck
scale [7], at which the theory breaks down. Another attempt, using the Hartle-Hawking “no
boundary” proposal [8], found that the most probable universes did not have enough inflation
[9]. No satisfactory answer to the question of why the scalar field was initially displaced from
the minimum of its potential has been found.
    In this paper we will reconsider an earlier model, in which inflation is driven by the trace
anomaly of a large number of matter fields. The Standard Model of particle physics contains
nearly a hundred fields. This is at least doubled if the Standard Model is embedded in a
supersymmetric theory. Therefore there were certainly a large number of matter fields present
in the early universe, so the large N approximation should hold in cosmology, even at the
beginning of the universe. In the large N approximation, one performs the path integral over
the matter fields in a given background to obtain an effective action that is a functional of the
background metric:                              Z
                                 exp(−W [g]) = d[φ] exp(−S[φ; g]).                             (1.1)
One then argues that the effect of gravitational fluctuations is small in comparison to the large
number of matter fluctuations. Thus one can neglect graviton loops, and look for a stationary
point of the combined gravitational action and the effective action for the matter fields. This is
equivalent to solving the Einstein equations with the source being the expectation value of the
matter energy momentum tensor:
                                          1
                                     Rij − Rgij = 8πGhTij i,                                   (1.2)
                                          2
where
                                                    2 δW
                                       hT ij i = − √         .                                 (1.3)
                                                     −g δgij

                                                 3
Finally, one can calculate linearized metric fluctuations about this stationary point metric and
check they are small. This is confirmed observationally by measurements of the cosmic mi-
crowave background, which indicate that the primordial metric fluctuations were of the order
of 10−5 [10].
    Matter fields might be expected to become effectively conformally invariant if their masses
are negligible compared to the spacetime curvature. Classical conformal invariance is broken
at the quantum level [11] (see [12, 13] for reviews), leading to an anomalous trace for the
energy-momentum tensor:
                                          g ij hTij i =
                                                      6 0.                                  (1.4)
This trace is entirely geometrical in origin and therefore independent of the quantum state. In
a maximally symmetric spacetime, the symmetry of the vacuum implies that the expectation
value of the energy momentum tensor can be expressed in terms of its trace
                                                    1
                                        h0|Tij |0i = gij g klh0|Tkl |0i.                                    (1.5)
                                                    4
Thus the trace anomaly acts just like a cosmological constant for these spacetimes. Hence a
positive trace anomaly permits a de Sitter solution to the Einstein equations [14].
    This is very interesting from the point of view of cosmology, as pointed out by Starobinsky
[15]. Starobinsky showed that the de Sitter solution is unstable, but could be long-lived, and
decays into a matter dominated Friedman-Robertson-Walker (FRW) universe. The purpose of
Starobinsky’s work was to demonstrate that quantum effects of matter fields might resolve the
Big Bang singularity1 . From a modern perspective, it is more interesting that the conformal
anomaly might have been the source of a finite but significant period of inflation in the early
universe. This inflation would be followed by particle production and (p)reheating during the
subsequent matter dominated phase. Starobinsky’s work is reviewed and extended by Vilenkin
in [17]. For a more recent discussion of the Starobinsky model, see [18].
    Starobinsky showed that the de Sitter phase is unstable both to the future and to the past, so
it was not clear how the universe could have entered the de Sitter phase. However, this problem
can be overcome by an appeal to quantum cosmology, which predicts that the de Sitter phase
of the universe is created by semi-classical tunneling from nothing. This process is mediated
by a four sphere cosmological instanton [17]. One of the results of this paper is that the four
sphere is not the only cosmological instanton in this model.
    In order to test the Starobinsky model, it is necessary to compare its predictions for the
fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) with observation. This was partly
addressed by Vilenkin [17]. Using an equation derived by Starobinsky [19], Vilenkin showed
that the amplitude of long wavelength gravitational waves could be brought within observational
limits at the expense of some fine-tuning of the coefficients parameterizing the trace anomaly.
Density perturbations were discussed by Starobinsky in [20].
    The analysis of Starobinsky and Vilenkin was complicated by the fact that tensor pertur-
bations destroy the conformal flatness of a FRW background, making the effective action for
matter fields hard to calculate. However, we now have a way of calculating the effective action
for a particular theory, namely N = 4 U(N) super Yang-Mills theory, using the AdS/CFT
   1
    Another paper [16] which discussed the effects of the trace anomaly in cosmology failed to obtain non-singular
solutions because it included a contribution from a classical fluid.


                                                        4
correspondence [21]. In this paper we will calculate the effective action for this theory in a
perturbed de Sitter background. This enables us to calculate the correlation function for metric
perturbations around the de Sitter background. We can then compare our results with observa-
tions. The fact that we are using the N = 4 Yang-Mills theory is probably not significant, and
we expect our results to be valid for any theory that is approximately massless during the de
Sitter phase. One might think that our results could shed light on the effects of matter interac-
tions during inflation since AdS/CFT involves a strongly interacting field theory. However, as
we shall explain, our results are actually independent of the Yang-Mills coupling.
    Our calculations will be performed in Euclidean signature (on the four sphere), and then
analytically continued to Lorentzian de Sitter space. The condition that all perturbations are
regular on the four sphere defines the initial quantum state for Lorentzian perturbations. The
four sphere instanton is much larger than the Planck scale (since we are dealing with a large N
theory), so there is a clear cut separation into background metric and fluctuation.
    We shall include in our action higher derivative counterterms, which arise naturally in the
renormalization of the Yang-Mills theory. There are three independent terms that are quadratic
in the curvature tensors: the Euler density, the square of the Ricci scalar and the square of the
Weyl tensor. The former just contributes a multiple of the Euler number to the action. Metric
perturbations do not change the Euler number, so this term has no effect. The square of the
Ricci scalar has the important effect of adjusting the coefficient of the ∇2 R term in the trace
anomaly. It is precisely this term that is responsible for the Starobinsky instability, so by varying
the coefficient of the R2 counter term we can adjust the duration of inflation. The Weyl-squared
counterterm does not affect the trace anomaly but it can contribute to suppression of tensor
perturbations. The effects of this term were neglected by Starobinsky and Vilenkin. They also
neglected the effects of the non-local part of the matter effective action. We shall take full
account of all these effects.
    Vilenkin showed that the initial de Sitter phase is followed by a phase of slow-roll inflation
before inflation ends and the matter-dominated phase begins. Since the horizon size grows
significantly during this slow-roll phase, it is important to investigate whether modes we observe
today left the horizon during the de Sitter phase or during the slow-roll phase. If the present
horizon size left during the de Sitter phase, we find that the amplitude of metric fluctuations
can be brought within observational bounds if N, the number of colours, is of order 105 . Such
a large value for N is rather worrying, which leads us to the second possibility, that the present
horizon size left during the slow-roll phase. Our results then suggest that the coefficient of
the R2 term must be at most of order 108 , and maybe much lower, but N is unconstrained
(except by the requirement that the large N approximation is valid so that AdS/CFT can be
used). We also find that the tensor perturbations can be suppressed independently of the scalar
perturbations by adjusting the coefficient of the Weyl-squared counterterm in the action.
    Inflation blows up small scale physics to macroscopic scales. This suggests that inflation
may lead to observational consequences of small-scale modifications of Einstein gravity, such as
extra dimensions. However, we find that the non-local part of the matter effective action has the
effect of strongly suppressing tensor fluctuations on very small scales, a result first noted in flat
space by Tomboulis [22]. This suggests that any small-scale modifications to four dimensional
Einstein gravity would be unobservable in the CMB since matter fields would dominate the
graviton propagator at the scales at which such modifications might be expected to become
important. This result is probably not restricted to trace anomaly driven inflation since it is

                                                 5
simply a consequence of the presence of a large number of matter fields. As we have mentioned,
there really are a large number of matter fields in the universe and these will suppress small-scale
graviton fluctuations in any model of inflation.
    We illustrate this point by considering a Randall-Sundrum (RS) [23] version of the Starobin-
sky model. In the RS model, our universe is regarded as a thin domain wall in anti-de Sitter
space (AdS). RS showed that linearized four dimensional gravity is recovered on the domain wall
at distances much larger that the AdS radius of curvature, but gravity looks five dimensional
at smaller scales. Therefore, if the AdS length scale is taken to be small, then the RS model
is a short distance modification of four dimensional Einstein gravity. We shall show that when
the large N field theory is included, the effects of the matter fields dominate the RS correc-
tions to the graviton propagator and render them unobservable. This work is an extension of
our previous paper [24] to include the effects of scalar perturbations and the higher derivative
counterterms in the action.
    This paper is organized as follows. We start in section 2 by showing that the Starobinsky
model has two instantons: the round four sphere and a new “double bubble” instanton. We
consider only the four sphere instanton in this paper. In section 3 we use the AdS/CFT cor-
respondence to calculate the effective action of the large N Yang-Mills theory on a perturbed
four sphere. Coupling this to the gravitational action then allows us to compute the scalar and
tensor graviton propagators on the four sphere. In section 4, we discuss the analytic structure
of our propagators. The tensor propagator is shown to be free of ghosts. In section 5, we show
how our Euclidean propagators are analytically continued to Lorentzian signature. Section 6
discusses two observational constraints on the Starobinsky model, namely the duration of infla-
tion and the amplitude of perturbations. In section 7, we use the RS version of the Starobinsky
model as an example to illustrate how matter fields strongly suppress metric perturbations on
small scales. Finally, we summarize our conclusions and suggest possible directions for future
work.


2       O(4) Instantons
2.1     Introduction
Homogeneous isotropic FRW universes are obtained by analytic continuation of cosmological in-
stantons invariant under the action of an O(4) isometry group. In other words, we are interested
in instantons with metrics of the form

                                         ds2 = dσ 2 + b(σ)2 dΩ23 .                                   (2.1)

We shall restrict ourselves to instantons with spherical topology, for which b(σ) vanishes at a
“North pole” and a “South pole”. Regularity requires that b′ (σ) = ±1 at these poles. (Instan-
tons with topology R × S 3 also exist but are excluded by the no boundary proposal because
they are non-compact.) The scale factor b(σ) is determined by Einstein’s equation2

                                            Gij = 8πGhTij i,                                         (2.2)
    2
    We use a positive signature metric and a curvature convention for which a sphere or de Sitter space has
positive Ricci scalar.


                                                    6
where the right hand side involves the expectation value of the energy momentum tensor of the
matter fields, which we are assuming to come from the N = 4 U(N) super Yang-Mills theory.
hTij i can be obtained for the most general quantum state of the Yang-Mills theory consistent
with O(4) symmetry by using the trace anomaly and energy conservation, as we shall describe
below.

2.2     The trace anomaly
The general expression for the trace anomaly of our strongly coupled large N CFT3 was calcu-
lated using AdS/CFT in [25]. It turns out that it is exactly the same as the one loop result for
the free theory, which is given for a general CFT by the following equation [12, 13]

                                       g ij hTij i = cF − aG + d∇2 R                                   (2.3)

where F is the square of the Weyl tensor:

                                              F = Cijkl C ijkl ,                                       (2.4)

G is proportional to the Euler density:

                                    G = Rijkl Rijkl − 4Rij Rij + R2 ,                                  (2.5)

and the constants a, c and d are given in terms of the field content of the CFT by
                                          1
                                 a=             (NS + 11NF + 62NV ) ,                                  (2.6)
                                       360(4π)2
                                        1
                                  c=          (NS + 6NF + 12NV ) ,                                     (2.7)
                                     120(4π)2
                                        1
                                  d=          (NS + 6NF − 18NV ) ,                                     (2.8)
                                     180(4π)2
where NS is the number of real scalar fields, NF the number of Dirac fermions and NV the
number of vector fields. The coefficients a and c are independent of renormalization scheme but
d is not. We have quoted the result given by zeta-function regularization or point-splitting; the
result given by dimensional regularization has +12 instead of −18 as the coefficient of NV [12].
In fact, d can be adjusted to any desired value by adding the finite counter term
                                                 αN 2 Z 4 √ 2
                                        Sct =           d x gR .                                       (2.9)
                                                192π 2
This counter term explicitly breaks conformal invariance. α is a dimensionless constant. The
field content of the Yang-Mills theory is NS = 6N 2 , NF = 2N 2 (there are 4N 2 Majorana
fermions, which is equivalent to 2N 2 Dirac fermions) and NV = N 2 . This gives

                                                   N2
                                        a=c=            ,     d = 0.                                  (2.10)
                                                  64π 2
   3
     We shall often refer to the N = 4 Yang-Mills theory as a CFT even though it is not conformally invariant
on the four sphere.

                                                      7
We have used the coefficient −18 for NV when calculating d – this is the value predicted by
AdS/CFT [25]. If d = 0 then inflation never ends in Starobinsky’s model. We shall therefore
include the finite counter term, which does not change a or c but gives
                                                 αN 2
                                              d=       .                                     (2.11)
                                                 16π 2
When we couple the Yang-Mills theory to gravity, the presence of Sct implies that we are
effectively dealing with a higher derivative theory of gravity. It is, of course, arbitrary whether
one regards Sct as part of the gravitational action or as part of the matter action. We have
adopted the latter perspective and therefore included an explicit factor of N 2 in the action
(since there are O(N 2 ) fields in the Yang-Mills theory).

2.3    Energy conservation
Having obtained the trace of the energy-momentum tensor, we can use energy-momentum con-
servation to obtain the full energy-momentum tensor. Introduce the energy density ρ and
pressure p, defined in an orthonormal frame by
                                 hTσσ i = −ρ,            hTαβ i = pδαβ .                    (2.12)
The minus sign in the first expression arises because we are considering Euclidean signature.
These must obey
                                       − ρ + 3p = hT i,                                (2.13)
and we also have the energy-momentum conservation equation
                                              3
                                       ρ′ +      b(p + ρ) = 0.                              (2.14)
                                              b′
Eliminating p gives an equation for ρ:
                                             ′
                                           b4 ρ    = −b3 b′ hT i.                           (2.15)
Substituting in the expression for hT i and integrating gives
               3N 2 (1 − b′ 2 )2
                       "                                                            #
                                                 1                  3 4
                                                                            
                                                        2     2             2
            ρ= 2 4               + α b2 b′ b′′′ − b2 b′′ + bb′ b′′ − b′ + b′ + C .          (2.16)
              8π b      4                        2                  2
The expression for p is easily determined from equation 2.13. The appearance of the constant
of integration C shows that the quantum state can contain an arbitrary amount of radiation.
Setting C = α/2 reproduces the energy-momentum tensor for the vacuum state. The cosmology
resulting from the trace anomaly in the presence of an arbitrary amount of null radiation was
investigated in [16]. The cosmological solutions obtained were generically singular. However,
Starobinsky [15] showed if this null radiation is not present (i.e., if C = α/2) then non-singular
solutions can be obtained.
    To conclude, we have found the energy-momentum tensor for a strongly coupled large N
Yang-Mills theory in the most general quantum state that is consistent with O(4) symmetry.
The effects of strong coupling do not show up in our energy-momentum tensor, which is of the
same form as used in [16, 15]. In the next subsection we shall use this result in the Einstein
equations to determine the shape of the instanton.

                                                     8
2.4    Shape of the instanton
Taking the σσ component of the Einstein equation gives

                                                b′ 2 − 1
                                         Gσσ ≡ 3 2 = −8πGρ.                                          (2.17)
                                                    b
Substituting in our result for ρ gives

        1 − b′ 2   N 2 G (1 − b′ 2 )2               b′′ 2 b′ 2 b′′ 3b′ 4 b′ 2
                           "                                                          !      #
                                          b′ b′′′                                          C
                 =                    + α         −      + 3 − 4 + 4                      + 4 .      (2.18)
          b2        π       4b4            b2       2b2     b      2b    b                 b

Regularity at the poles of the instanton requires b′ → ±1 as b → 0. Substituting this into
equation 2.18, one finds that b′′ = 0 and C = α/2 are also required for regularity at the poles.
In other words, the no boundary proposal has singled out a particular class of quantum states
for us, namely those that do not contain any radiation. These are precisely the states that can
give rise to non-singular cosmological solutions. In our picture this is because such cosmological
solutions can be obtained from a Euclidean instanton.
    It is convenient to introduce a length scale R defined by

                                                  2 N 2G
                                                R =      .                                           (2.19)
                                                     4π
We can now define dimensionless variables

                                     σ̃ = σ/R,        f (σ̃) = b(σ)/R.                               (2.20)

Equation 2.18 becomes
                                                                              !4                
      1 − f ′2   (1 − f ′ 2 )2        2f ′ f ′′′ f ′′ 2     f ′2 f ′′     f′           f ′2  1
               =               + 2α            −       + 2           − 3           + 2 4 + 4.      (2.21)
        f2           f4                 f2        f2          f3          f            f    f

The boundary conditions at the poles are f = 0, f ′ = ±1, f ′′ = 0 (where a prime now denotes
a derivate with respect to σ̃). One solution to equation 2.21 is

                                               f (σ̃) = sin σ̃,                                      (2.22)

which simply gives us a round four sphere instanton. Note that the expression multiplying α
vanishes for this solution. Another simple solution is

                                                 f (σ̃) = σ̃,                                        (2.23)

i.e. flat Euclidean space.
    In order to integrate 2.21 numerically, we assume that σ̃ = 0 is a regular “North pole” of
the instanton. We start the integration at σ̃ = ǫ. The boundary conditions for the integration
are
                                               1
                                  f (ǫ) = ǫ + f ′′′ (0)ǫ3 + . . .                       (2.24)
                                               6
                                               1
                                  f ′ (ǫ) = 1 + f ′′′ (0)ǫ2 + . . .                     (2.25)
                                               2
                                                      9
                        0.6




                        0.4




                        0.2




                              0         1                 2                 3   4



Figure 1: Scale factor f (σ̃) for a regular “double bubble” instanton with α = −1 and f ′′′ (0) =
−2.05.

                                            f ′′ (ǫ) = f ′′′ (0)ǫ + . . .                          (2.26)
We shall neglect the higher order terms (denotes by the ellipses) in our numerical integration.
It is important to retain all of the terms displayed in order to obtain f ′′′ (ǫ) = f ′′′ (0) + . . . from
the equation of motion. Note that f ′′′ (0) is a free parameter. Our strategy is to choose the
value of f ′′′ (0) so that the instanton is compact and closes off smoothly at the South pole.
       The instanton is non-compact when f ′′′ (0) > 0. The solution is flat Euclidean space when
f ′′′ (0) = 0. We shall therefore concentrate on f ′′′ (0) < 0. The four sphere solution has f ′′′ (0) =
−1. It is convenient to discuss the cases α > 0 and α < 0 separately.
       If α > 0 then there are two types of behaviour. (i) −1 < f ′′′ (0) < 0 the instanton is non-
compact. For f ′′′ (0) close to −1, the scale factor increases to a local maximum and then starts
to decrease. However, before reaching f = 0, the scale factor turns around again and increases
indefinitely. (ii) f ′′′ (0) < −1. These instantons are compact but do not have a regular South
pole since b′ diverges there. They are the analogues of the singular instantons discussed in [9].
       If α < 0 then there are two types of behaviour. (i) −1 < f ′′′ (0) < 0. These instantons are
compact with an irregular South pole. (ii) f ′′′ (0) < −1. The scale factor of these instantons
increases to a local maximum, decreases to a local minimum, then has another maximum before
decreasing to zero at the South pole, which is irregular. The instanton therefore has two “peaks”.
There is a critical value γ(α) such that for γ < f ′′′ (0) < −1 the larger peak is near the North
pole while for f ′′′ (0) < γ, the larger peak is near the South pole. It follows that when f ′′′ (0) = γ
the peaks have the same size and the instanton is symmetrical about its equator with a regular
South pole. The scale factor is shown in figure 1.
       To summarize, if α < 0 then there are two regular compact instantons, namely the round
four sphere and a new “double bubble” instanton. We shall not have much to say about the new
instanton in this paper since the lack of an analytical solution makes dealing with perturbations
of this instanton rather difficult.



                                                        10
2.5    Analytic continuation
The four sphere instanton can be analytically continued to Lorentzian signature by slicing at
the equator σ̃ = π/2 and writing
                                              π
                                        σ̃ = − it/R,                                   (2.27)
                                              2
which yields the metric on a closed de Sitter universe:

                                  ds2 = −dt2 + R2 cosh2 (t/R)dΩ23 .                        (2.28)

The Hubble parameter is R−1 , which is much smaller than the Planck mass because N is large.
A change of coordinate takes one from a closed FRW metric to an open FRW metric.
    The double bubble instanton can be analytically continued across its “equator” to give a
closed FRW universe. Numerical studies suggest that this universe rapidly collapses. How-
ever, this instanton can also be continued to an inflationary open universe (the details of the
continuation are the same as in [9]) and therefore may give rise to realistic cosmology.


3     Metric perturbations
3.1    Scalars, vectors and tensors
In this section we shall calculate correlation functions for metric perturbations around our four
sphere instanton. These can then be analytically continued to yield correlation functions in de
Sitter space. The metric on the perturbed four sphere can be written

                                     ds2 = (R2 γ̂ij + hij )dxi dxj ,                        (3.1)

where γ̂ij denotes the metric on a unit four sphere. The perturbation can be decomposed into
scalar, vector and tensor parts with respect to the four sphere:
                                            ˆ (i χj) (x) + ∇
                       hij (x) = θij (x) + 2∇              ˆ i∇
                                                              ˆ j φ(x) + γ̂ij ψ(x).         (3.2)
                                                  ˆ θij is a transverse traceless symmetric
The connection on the unit four sphere is denoted ∇.
tensor with respect to the four sphere:
                                             ˆ i θij = θi = 0,
                                             ∇                                              (3.3)
                                                        i

where indices i, j are raised and lowered with γ̂ij . χi is a transverse vector:
                                                ˆ i χi = 0.
                                                ∇                                           (3.4)

There is a small ambiguity in our decomposition - it is invariant under φ → φ + Y , ψ → ψ + λY
where Y satisfies
                                     ∇  ˆ j Y + λγ̂ij Y = 0.
                                     ˆ i∇                                                 (3.5)
This equation can only be solved when λ = 1. The solutions are simply the regular p = 1
spherical harmonics on S 4 , i.e., the regular p = 1 solutions of
                                                        
                                           ˆ 2 + p(p + 3) Y = 0.
                                           ∇                                                (3.6)

                                                    11
The spherical harmonics are labelled with integers p, k, l, m with 0 ≤ |m| ≤ l ≤ k ≤ p. Hence
there are five independent spherical harmonics with p = 1, given in terms of spherical harmonics
Yklm on the three sphere by
                                     sin ρY1lm ,   cos ρY000                               (3.7)
where ρ is the polar angle on the four sphere. These five harmonics correspond to gauge
transformations involving the five conformal Killing vector fields on the four sphere [26]. If we
assume that ψ is regular on S 4 then we can expand it in terms of spherical harmonics. We shall
fix the residual gauge ambiguity by demanding that ψ contain no contribution from the p = 1
harmonics.
    It is possible to gauge away φ and χi through a coordinate transformation on the four sphere
of the form xi → xi − η i − ∂ i η, where η i is a transverse vector and η is a scalar. For the moment
we shall use a general gauge but later we will assume that φ and χi vanish.

3.2    Matter effective action
We need to calculate the action for metric perturbations. The hardest part to calculate is
the effective action for the matter fields. This can be expanded around a round four sphere
background:
                            1     √
                                    Z
                             (0)
                 W = W −      d4 x γhTij (x)ihij (x)
                            2 Z
                     1    4 √       √
                       Z
                   +     d x γ d4 x′ γhij (x)hTij (x)Tkl (x′ )ihkl (x′ ) + . . .               (3.8)
                     4
Here γ denotes the determinant of the metric on the sphere. If we know the one and two
point function of the CFT energy momentum tensor on a round S 4 then we can calculate the
effective action to second order in the metric perturbation. The one point function is given
by the conformal anomaly on the round four sphere. In flat space, the 2-point function is
determined entirely by conformal invariance. On the sphere, symmetry determines the 2-point
function only up to a single unknown function [27]. However, the sphere is conformally flat so
one can calculate the 2-point function on the sphere using a conformal transformation from flat
space. The energy-momentum tensor transforms anomalously, so there will be a contribution
from the trace anomaly in the transformation. Therefore, the 2-point function on the sphere is
determined by two quantities, namely the 2-point function in flat space, and the trace anomaly.
For the N = 4 super Yang-Mills theory that we are considering, both of these quantities are
independent of the Yang-Mills coupling. It follows that the 2-point function on the sphere
(or any other conformally flat space) must be independent of coupling. Therefore the effective
action will be independent of coupling to second order in the metric perturbation so the effects
of strong coupling will not show up in our results.
    For the moment, we shall consider the four sphere to have arbitrary radius R rather than
using the value given by equation 2.19. Introduce a fictional ball of AdS that has the sphere as
its boundary. Let ¯l, Ḡ be the AdS radius and Newton constant of this region. If we take ¯l to
zero then the sphere is effectively at infinity in AdS so we can use AdS/CFT to calculate the
generating functional of the CFT on the sphere. In other words, ¯l is acting like a cut-off in the



                                                 12
CFT and taking it to zero corresponds to removing the cut-off. However the relation
                                                    ¯l3   2N 2
                                                        =      ,                                               (3.9)
                                                    Ḡ     π
implies that if ¯l is taken to zero then we must also take Ḡ to zero since N is fixed (and large).
   The CFT generating functional is given by evaluating the action of the bulk metric g that
matches onto the metric h of the boundary [30, 31], and adding surface counterterms to cancel
divergences as ¯l, Ḡ → 0 [31, 32, 25, 33, 34, 35, 36]:

                      W [h] = SEH [g] + SGH [g] + S1 [h] + S2 [h] + S3 [h] + Sct [h],                        (3.10)

where SEH denotes the five dimensional Einstein-Hilbert action with a negative cosmological
constant:
                                        1       5 √       12
                                             Z              
                              SEH = −          d x g R + ¯2 ,                         (3.11)
                                      16π Ḡ               l
the overall minus sign arises because we are considering a Euclidean signature theory. The
second term in the action is the Gibbons-Hawking boundary term [29]:
                                                       1 Z 4 √
                                          SGH = −           d x hK,                                          (3.12)
                                                      8π Ḡ
where K is the trace of the extrinsic curvature of the boundary and h the determinant of the
induced metric. The first two surface counterterms are
                                            3
                                                  Z
                                                      4
                                                         √
                                     S1 =           d   x  h,                         (3.13)
                                          8π Ḡ¯l
                                            ¯l Z     √
                                            S2 = d4 x hR,                              (3.14)
                                          32π Ḡ
where R now refers to the Ricci scalar of the boundary metric. The third counterterm is4
                                   ¯l3                Z     √          1
                                                                             
                        S3 = −           log(¯l/R) − β    d4 x h Rij Rij − R2 ,                              (3.15)
                                 64π Ḡ                                   3
 where Rij is the Ricci tensor of the boundary metric and boundary indices i, j are raised and
 lowered with the boundary metric. This term is required to cancel logarithmic divergences as
¯l, Ḡ → 0. The finite part of this term is arbitrary, which is why we have included the constant
 β. The integrand of this term is a combination of the Euler density and the square of the
 Weyl tensor. The former just contributes a constant term to the action but the latter may
 have important physical effects so we shall include it. For a pure gravity theory, adding a Weyl
 squared term to the action results in spin-2 ghosts in flat space but we shall see that this is not
 the case when the Yang-Mills theory is also included. The final counterterm Sct is the finite R2
 counterterm defined in equation 2.9.
      When the four sphere boundary is unperturbed, the metric in the AdS region is

                                      ds2 = ¯l2 (dy 2 + sinh2 yγ̂ij dxi dxj ),                               (3.16)
   4
     In the prefactor of this equation, R refers to the radius of the sphere. In the integrand it refers to the Ricci
scalar.

                                                         13
and the sphere is at y = y0 , where y0 is given by R = ¯l sinh y0 . Note that y0 → ∞ as ¯l → 0 since
R is fixed. In order to use AdS/CFT for the perturbed sphere, we need to know how the metric
perturbation extends into the bulk. This is done by solving the Einstein equations linearized
about the AdS background.
    Our first task is therefore to solve the Einstein equations in the bulk to find the bulk metric
perturbation that approaches hij on the boundary. We shall impose the boundary condition that
the metric perturbation be regular throughout the AdS region. The most general perturbation
of the bulk metric can be written
                ds2 = ¯l2 (dy 2 + sinh2 yγ̂ij dxi dxj ) + Ady 2 + 2Bi dydxi + Hij dxi dxj .   (3.17)
The first step is to decompose the bulk metric fluctuation into scalar, vector and tensor parts
with respect to the four sphere:
                                            ˆ (i χj) (y, x) + ∇
                 Hij (y, x) = θij (y, x) + 2∇                 ˆ i∇
                                                                 ˆ j φ(y, x) + γ̂ij ψ(y, x). (3.18)
The connection on the four sphere is denoted ∇.   ˆ θij is a transverse traceless symmetric tensor
with respect to the four sphere:
                                         ˆ i θij = θi = 0,
                                         ∇                                                  (3.19)
                                                     i
where indices i, j are raised and lowered with γ̂ij . χi is a transverse vector:
                                             ˆ i χi = 0.
                                             ∇                                              (3.20)
We can also decompose Bi into a transverse vector and a scalar:
                                            Bi = B̂i + ∂i B.                                  (3.21)
The quantities that we have introduced are gauge dependent. If we perform an infinitesimal
change of coordinate then the five dimensional metric perturbation undergoes the gauge trans-
formation
                                   δgµν → δgµν + ∇ ¯ µ ξν + ∇
                                                            ¯ ν ξµ .                           (3.22)
We are using Greek letters to denote five dimensional indices. ∇     ¯ is the connection with respect
to the background AdS metric. The gauge parameters ξµ can be decomposed with respect to
the four sphere. ξy is a scalar and ξi can be decomposed into a transverse vector and a scalar.
Thus in total, we have four scalar degrees of freedom in our metric perturbation but there are
two scalar gauge degrees of freedom so we can only expect two gauge invariant scalars. Similarly
we have two vectors in our metric perturbation, but one vector gauge degree of freedom so there
is only one gauge invariant vector quantity. The tensor part of the metric perturbation is gauge
invariant. It is easy to check that the following scalar quantities are gauge invariant:
                                                                 !
                                                         ψ
                                  Ψ1 ≡ A − ∂y                     ,                           (3.23)
                                                    cosh y sinh y
                                    1             ψ
                         Ψ2 ≡ B − ∂y φ −                    + coth y φ.                   (3.24)
                                    2       2 cosh y sinh y
Note that the residual gauge invariance discussed in section 3.1 is also present here – we shall
have more to say about this later on.
   The gauge invariant vector quantity is
                                      Xi ≡ B̂i − ∂y χi + 2 coth yχi.                          (3.25)
The gauge invariant tensor is θij .

                                                   14
3.3    Solving the Einstein equations: scalars and vectors
The Einstein equation in the bulk is
                                            1       6
                                       Rµν − Rgµν = ¯2 gµν .                               (3.26)
                                            2       l
We want to solve this such that our metric matches onto the perturbed metric on the four sphere
boundary. The solution for the unperturbed sphere is simply AdS. Denote this background
metric by ḡµν . Linearizing around this background yields the equation

              ¯ µ∇
              ∇  ¯ ρ δgρν + ∇  ¯ ρ δgρµ − ∇
                            ¯ ν∇          ¯ 2 δgµν − ∇  ¯ ν δg ρ = 2 δgµν − 2 ḡµν δg ρ,
                                                     ¯ µ∇                                  (3.27)
                                                              ρ    ¯l2      ¯l2      ρ


This equation is gauge invariant and can therefore be expressed in terms of the gauge invariant
variables. The yy component gives
                   ˆ 2 Ψ1 − 2∂y ∇
                   ∇            ˆ 2 Ψ2 − 4 cosh y sinh y∂y Ψ1 − 8 sinh2 yΨ1 = 0.           (3.28)

The vector part of the iy components gives
                                            ˆ 2 Xi = −3Xi .
                                            ∇                                              (3.29)

The scalar part of the iy components gives

                                  ∂i (cosh y sinh yΨ1 − 2Ψ2 ) = 0.                         (3.30)

The tensor part of the ij components gives
                                                               ˆ 2 θij = 0.
                            ∂y2 θij − 4 coth2 yθij + cosech2 y ∇                           (3.31)

   The vector part of the ij components gives
                                                     ˆ (i Xj) = 0.
                                     (∂y + 2 coth y) ∇                                     (3.32)

The scalar part of the ij components gives
                   ˆ i∇
                   ∇  ˆ j (−Ψ1 + 2∂y Ψ2 + 4 coth yΨ2)
                                                                                 
                                                                        ˆ 2 Ψ2 = 0.
               + γ̂ij cosh y sinh y∂y Ψ1 + (8 cosh2 y − 2)Ψ1 + 2 coth y ∇                  (3.33)

Solving equation 3.32 yields
                                                        2
                               ˆ (i Xj) (y, x) = sinh y0 ∇
                               ∇                         ˆ (i Xj) (y0 , x),                (3.34)
                                                 sinh2 y
which is singular at y = 0. We must therefore take the solution
                                          ˆ (i Xj) (y, x) = 0.
                                          ∇                                                (3.35)

Thus the gauge invariant vector perturbation vanishes: we are free to choose Xi = 0.

                                                   15
   Rearranging the equations for the scalars, one obtains
                                                 ˆ 2 Ψ1 = −4Ψ1
                                                 ∇                                           (3.36)

and                                                                          
                           cosh y sinh y∂y + (4 cosh2 y − 2)         ˆ i∇
                                                                     ∇  ˆ j + γ̂ij Ψ1 = 0.   (3.37)
This has the solution
                                                      2         2
                       ˆ j + γ̂ij Ψ1 (y, x) = sinh y0 cosh y0 ∇
                                                                                 
                    ˆ i∇
                    ∇                                          ˆ i∇
                                                                  ˆ j + γ̂ij Ψ1 (y0, x).     (3.38)
                                               sinh2 y cosh2 y
Once again, this is singular at y = 0 unless we take
                                                         
                                            ˆ i∇
                                            ∇  ˆ j + γ̂ij Ψ1 (y, x) = 0.                     (3.39)

There is a regular solution to this equation, however it is simply an artifact of the ambiguity in
our metric decomposition discussed in section 3.1 (see equation 3.5) so Ψ1 can be consistently
set to zero. Equation 3.30 then implies that Ψ2 is an arbitrary function of y. This is again
related to an ambiguity in the metric decomposition: we are free to add an arbitrary function
of y to φ without changing the metric perturbation. Hence we can choose Ψ2 = 0.
    To summarize: we have solved the bulk Einstein equation for the gauge invariant vector and
scalars, obtaining the result
                                       Ψ1 = Ψ2 = Xi = 0.                                    (3.40)
   So far we have been working in a general gauge. We shall now specialize to Gaussian normal
coordinates, in which we define ly to be the geodesic distance from some origin in our ball
of perturbed AdS, and then introduce coordinates xi on surfaces of constant y (which have
spherical topology). In these coordinates we have

                                               A = B = B̂i = 0.                              (3.41)

The presence of a metric perturbation implies that the boundary of the ball is not at constant
geodesic distance from the origin. Instead it will be at a position

                                                 y = y0 + ξ(x).                              (3.42)

We can now use our solution 3.40 to write down the bulk metric perturbation in Gaussian
normal coordinates:
                               ψ(y, x) = f (x) sinh y cosh y,                    (3.43)
                                φ(y, x) = f (x) sinh y cosh y + g(x) sinh2 y,                (3.44)
                                            χi (y, x) = χ̂i (x) sinh2 y,                     (3.45)
where f , g are arbitrary functions of x and χ̂i is an arbitrary transverse vector function of x.
We now appear to have three independent scalar functions of x to deal with (namely f , g and
ξ). These should be specified by demanding that the bulk metric perturbation match onto the
boundary metric perturbation. However the boundary metric perturbation is specified by only


                                                          16
two scalars. We therefore need another boundary condition: regularity at the origin. Solutions
proportional to sinh y cosh y are unacceptable since they lead to

                                              ḡ µν δgµν ∝ coth y,                                        (3.46)

which is singular at y = 0. We must therefore set f (x) = 0. To first order, the induced metric
perturbation on the boundary is

                               hij (x) = Hij (y0 , x) + 2l2 sinh y0 cosh y0 γ̂ij ξ.                       (3.47)

Recall that Hij is given by equation 3.18. The left hand side is decomposed into scalar, vec-
tor and tensor pieces in equation 3.25 . We can substitute the solution for the bulk metric
perturbation into the right hand side and read off

                                       ψ(x) = 2l2 sinh y0 cosh y0 ξ(x),                                   (3.48)

                                            φ(x) = g(x) sinh2 y0 ,                                        (3.49)
                                          χi (y, x) = χ̂i (x) sinh2 y.                                    (3.50)
These equations determine ξ(x), g(x) and χ̂i (x) in terms of the boundary metric perturbation.
In section 3.1, we showed that φ(x) and χi (x) could be gauged away so we shall now set

                                          g(x) = 0,          χ̂i (x) = 0.                                 (3.51)

This implies that
                                 φ(y, x) = ψ(y, x) = 0,            χi (y, x) = 0.                         (3.52)
In other words, all scalar and vector perturbations vanish in the bulk: the bulk perturbation is
transverse and traceless. The only degrees of freedom that remain are therefore the bulk tensor
perturbation and the scalar perturbation ξ(x) describing the displacement of the boundary.

3.4     Tensor perturbations
The tensor perturbations are less trivial: we have to solve equation 3.31. This was done in [24]
                                               (p)
by expanding in tensor spherical harmonics Hij . These obey
                                               (p)      ˆ i Hij(p) (x) = 0,
                                        γ̂ ij Hij (x) = ∇                                                 (3.53)

and they are regular tensor eigenfunctions of the Laplacian:
                                       ˆ 2 Hij(p) = (2 − p(p + 3)) Hij(p) ,
                                       ∇                                                                  (3.54)

where p = 2, 3, . . .. We have suppressed extra labels k, l, m, . . . on these harmonics. The
harmonics are orthonormal with respect to the obvious inner product. Further properties are
given in [28].
   5
     We apologize for our slightly confusing notation: ψ(x), φ(x) and χi (x) in equation 3.2 have, so far, nothing
to do with the bulk quantities ψ(y, x), φ(y, x) and χi (y, x).


                                                        17
   The boundary condition at y = y0 is6 θij (y0 , x) = θij (x), where θij (x) is the tensor part of
the metric perturbation on the boundary. Imposing this condition together with regularity at
the origin gives a unique bulk solution [24]
                                      X fp (y)        (p)
                                                               Z       q
                                                                                      (p)
                       θij (y, x) =                  Hij (x)       d4 x′ γ̂θkl (x′ )Hkl (x′ ),      (3.55)
                                      p   fp (y0 )
where fp is given in terms of a hypergeometric function:
                                  sinhp+2 y                                    2
                       fp (y) =             2 F1 (p/2, (p + 1)/2, p + 5/2, tanh y).                 (3.56)
                                   coshp y

3.5     The gravitational action
We have now solved the Einstein equations in the bulk and found a solution that matches onto
the metric perturbation of the boundary. The next step is to compute the action of this solution.
The bulk contribution from the Einstein-Hilbert action with cosmological constant is
                     ¯l3 Z        q Z y0 +ξ
          Sbulk   =           4
                             d x γ̂         dy sinh4 y                                              (3.57)
                    2π Ḡ            0
                       1
                           Z
                                5  √  
                                                   1   6
                                                             
                                                                µν       µνρσ
                                                                               
                  −           d x ḡ − R̄µν − R̄ḡµν − 2 ḡµν δg − δgµν ∆L δgρσ .
                    16π Ḡ                         2   l
The term that is first order in δgµν will vanish because the background obeys the Einstein
equation. The second order term involves the Lichnerowicz operator (generalized to include the
effect of a cosmological constant) ∆L , which is a second order differential operator with the
symmetry property
                                        ∆µνρσ
                                         L    = ∆ρσµν
                                                  L   .                                  (3.58)
This term vanishes because the perturbation is on shell, i.e.,
                                                ∆µνρσ
                                                 L    δgρσ = 0.                                     (3.59)
We are left simply with the background contribution
                    ¯l3 Z      q Z y0 +ξ
       Sbulk   =             4
                          d x γ̂          dy sinh4 y                                               (3.60)
                 2π Ḡ               0
                 ¯l3 Ω4 Z y0                ¯l3 Z      q                                       
               =              dy sinh4 y +         d4 x γ̂ 4 sinh4 y0 ξ + 8 sinh3 y0 cosh y0 ξ 2 ,
                 2π Ḡ 0                   8π Ḡ
where Ω4 denotes the volume of a unit four sphere. Of course, in order to rearrange the
Einstein-Hilbert action into the form 3.57 we have to integrate by parts several times, giving
rise to surface terms. These will depend on derivatives of the bulk metric perturbation evaluated
at the boundary. Since there are only tensor degrees of freedom excited in the bulk, only tensors
will occur in these surface terms – there will be no dependence on ξ. The surface terms are
                                 ¯l3 Z
                                                                                            !
                                           q    3             coth y0
                       Ssurf =         d4 x γ̂ ¯4 θij ∂y θij − ¯4 θij θij .                         (3.61)
                               16π Ḡ          4l               l
  6
     The boundary is actually at y = y0 + ξ(x), which gives higher order corrections. These would appear at
third order in the action as couplings between tensors and scalars.

                                                         18
    The second contribution to the gravitational action is the Gibbons-Hawking term. In
evaluating this, it is important to remember that the unit normal to the boundary changes
when we perturb the bulk metric. The boundary is a hypersurface defined by the condition
f (y, x) ≡ y − ξ(x) = y0 . The unit normal is therefore given to second order by

                                                ∂i ξ∂ i ξ
                                                             !
                                    n = ¯l 1 −        2   dy − ¯l∂i ξdxi .                                  (3.62)
                                               2 sinh y

Note that this holds for a range of y and therefore defines a unit covector field that is normal
to the family of hypersurfaces f = constant. In other words, it defines an extension of the unit
normal on the boundary into a neighbourhood of the boundary. Written as a vector, the normal
takes the form
                              ∂i ξ∂ i ξ                   ∂i ξ     θij (y, x)∂j ξ
                                              !                                       !
                        1                         ∂                                        ∂
                     n= ¯ 1−                         − ¯         −  ¯l3 sinh4 y               ,             (3.63)
                        l    2 sinh2 y            ∂y   l sinh2 y                          ∂xi

where θij (y, x) is the bulk tensor perturbation. The trace of the extrinsic curvature is

                                                   K ≡ ∇µ nµ .                                              (3.64)

In evaluating this one must take account of both the perturbation in the unit normal and the
perturbation in the connection. The result is
                       4                 1   ˆ 2 ξ − cosh y ∂i ξ∂ i ξ
                  K =  ¯l coth y − ¯l sinh y
                                           2 ∇      ¯l sinh3 y
                            1     ij ˆ ˆ            1        ij         cosh y ij
                   + ¯3        4 θ ∇i ∇j ξ − ¯5          4 θ ∂y θij + ¯5        θ θij . (3.65)
                       l sinh y                2l sinh y              l sinh5 y
                                                          √
This has to be evaluated at y = y0 + ξ. To evaluate γ on the boundary, we need to know the
induced boundary metric perturbation to second order:

 hij (x) = θij (y0, x) + 2¯l2 sinh y0 cosh y0 γ̂ij ξ + ¯l2 2 sinh2 y0 + 1 γ̂ij ξ 2 + ¯l2 ∂i ξ∂j ξ + ξ∂y θij . (3.66)
                                                                         


These results can now be substituted into the Gibbons-Hawking term, yielding
                   ¯l3 Z      q h                                              
      SGH = −             d4 x γ̂ 4 cosh y0 sinh3 y0 + sinh2 y0 16 sinh2 y0 + 12 ξ         (3.67)
                  8π Ḡ
                                                                                  1 ij
                                                                                       
                                       2            2                     ˆ 2
              + cosh y0 sinh y0 32 sinh y0 + 12 ξ − 3 cosh y0 sinh y0 ξ ∇ ξ − ¯4 θ ∂y θij .
                                                                                2l
We have integrated some terms by parts. So far, we have expressed the scalar part of the action
in terms of ξ. However, we really want to express everything in terms of the induced metric on
the boundary, which has scalar part ψ(x). This can be done by taking the trace of equation
3.66 and solving for ξ in terms of ψ to second order, giving
                                                                
                           ψ           2 sinh2 y0 + 1 ψ 2          ∂i ψ∂ i ψ
                ξ = ¯2               − ¯4                 −                        .                        (3.68)
                   2l sinh y0 cosh y0 8l sinh3 y0 cosh3 y0 32¯l4 sinh3 y0 cosh3 y0


                                                        19
The total contribution from the Einstein-Hilbert and Gibbons-Hawking terms is given by the
sum of the following
                                        3¯l3 Ω4 y0
                                               Z
                               (0)
                             Sgrav =−              dy sinh2 y cosh2 y,               (3.69)
                                         2π Ḡ 0
                                     3¯l3        q 1
                                           Z
                           (1)                 4
                          Sgrav = −           d x γ̂ ¯2 cosh y0 sinh y0 ψ,           (3.70)
                                    4π Ḡ            l
                                                                
                 (2)
                           ¯l3 Z
                                  4
                                    q     3 2 sinh2 y0 + 1 ψ 2              ˆ 2ψ
                                                                         3ψ ∇
                Sgrav = −        d x γ̂                         −
                                           2¯l4 sinh y0 cosh y0   8¯l4 sinh y0 cosh y0
                                        
                          8π Ḡ
                                                                                           #
                                                                1               coth y0 ij
                                                              − ¯4 θij ∂y θij −        θ θij .        (3.71)
                                                               8l                 2¯l4

We can now expand the action in powers of ¯l/R (using sinh y0 = R/¯l). This gives terms that
diverge as ¯l−4 and ¯l−2 as ¯l goes to zero. For the scalar perturbation, these divergences are
cancelled by the counter terms S1 and S2 . For the tensor perturbation (dealt with in [24]), the
third counter term S3 is needed to cancel a logarithmic divergence7 .
    The final term that we have to include in the effective action is the finite counter term Sct .
Evaluating this to second order gives

                3αN 2 Ω4    3αN 2                                            ˆ 2 θij − 4 θij θij .
                                                               ˆ 2 ψ + 2 θij ∇
                                      Z       q                                                 
        Sct =            +                          ˆ 4 ψ + 4ψ ∇
                                          d4 x γ̂ ψ ∇                                                 (3.72)
                  4π 2     64π 2 R4                                    3               3
The final result for the Yang-Mills effective action is

                                      W = W (0) + W (1) + W (2) + . . .                               (3.73)

where
                                     3βN 2 Ω4 3αN 2 Ω4 3N 2 Ω4
                         W (0) = −             +          +        (4 log 2 − 1) ,                    (3.74)
                                       8π 2        4π 2      32π 2
                                           (1)    3N 2 Z 4 q
                                       W =                d x γ̂ ψ,                                   (3.75)
                                                 16π 2 R2

                              3N 2
                                           Zq h                              i
                  W (2) = −            d 4
                                           x  γ̂  ψ ˆ 2 + 2 ψ − αψ ∇
                                                    ∇                 ˆ 4 + 4∇
                                                                             ˆ2 ψ
                             64π 2 R4
                              N2 X
                                       Z         q                2
                                              4 ′    ij  ′   (p) ′
                         +                   d x γ̂ θ (x )Hij (x )                                    (3.76)
                           256π 2 R4 p
                         × (Ψ(p) + 2βp(p + 1)(p + 2)(p + 3) − 4αp(p + 3)) ,

where

           Ψ(p) = p(p + 1)(p + 2)(p + 3) [ψ(p/2 + 5/2) + ψ(p/2 + 2) − ψ(2) − ψ(1)]
                  +p4 + 2p3 − 5p2 − 10p − 6.                                                          (3.77)
   7
     This counter term is formed from the Euler number and the square of the Weyl tensor, neither of which is
affected by scalar perturbations. S3 therefore does not contribute to the action for scalar perturbations.


                                                         20
The scalar perturbations have an action that can be expressed simply in position space. How-
ever, the tensor perturbations are given in momentum space where they have an action with
complicated non-polynomial dependence on p. This corresponds to a non-local action in position
space. At large p it behaves like p4 log p, as expected from the flat space result for hTij (x)Ti′ j ′ (x′ )i
[30].

3.6     Metric correlation functions
Our theory is just four dimensional Einstein gravity coupled to the Yang-Mills theory, with
action
                                            1         √
                                               Z
                                   S=−            d4 x gR + W,                             (3.78)
                                         16πG
where we have not included a Gibbons-Hawking term because the instanton has no boundary.
Note that we are still working in Euclidean signature. W denotes the Yang-Mills effective action,
including the effect of the finite counterterms. G is the four dimensional Newton constant. In
order to compute the two point correlation functions of metric perturbations we need to calculate
the terms in S that are quadratic in the metric perturbations described by θij and ψ.
    To second order, the Einstein-Hilbert action of the perturbed four sphere is

           3Ω4 R2    3                            1             ˆ 2 ψ + 2θij θij − 1 θij ∇
                                                                               q 3
                                 Z       q                      Z                                              
   SEH = −        −                  4
                                     d x γ̂ψ +       d x γ̂    ψ∇          4             ˆ 2 θij .
            4πG     4πG                        16πGR2        2                     4
                                                                                                (3.79)
Adding the Yang-Mills effective actions gives the total action. This has a non-vanishing piece
linear in ψ. Varying ψ fixes R to take the value given by equation 2.19, which implies that the
linear term vanishes. Equation 2.19 can be used to write G in terms of R, which brings the
quadratic part of the scalar action to the form8

                                       3N 2
                                                Z     q                                         
                         Sscalar =                              ˆ2 −1
                                                    d4 x γ̂ ψ 2α∇                       ˆ 2 + 4 ψ,
                                                                                        ∇                      (3.80)
                                     128π 2R4
and the quadratic part of the tensor action becomes

                                 N2 X
                                                Z          q                              2
                                                      4 ′             ij        (p)
                     Stensor =                       dx        γ̂ θ        (x )Hij (x′ )
                                                                               ′
                                                                                                F (p, α, β),   (3.81)
                               256π 2 R4 p

where

         F (p, α, β) = p2 + 3p + 6 + Ψ(p) + 2βp(p + 1)(p + 2)(p + 3) − 4αp(p + 3).                             (3.82)

From these expressions we can read off the correlation functions of metric perturbations:

                                       32π 2 R4
                                                                    "                                    #
                                ′                      1        1
                     hψ(x)ψ(x )i =                          −        ,                                         (3.83)
                                     2          2   ˆ 2 + m2 −∇
                                   3N (−α)(4 + m ) −∇         ˆ2 − 4
   8
     If α = 0 then this is almost exactly the same as the scalar action one would obtain for perturbations about
a de Sitter solution supported by a cosmological constant. The only difference is that the overall sign is reversed.
This implies that, with the exception of the homogeneous mode, the conformal factor problem of Euclidean
quantum gravity is solved by coupling to the Yang-Mills theory when α = 0.


                                                          21
where
                                                                   1
                                                       m2 =          .                             (3.84)
                                                                  2α
The tensor correlator is
                                                             ∞
                                                  128π 2 R4 X     (p)
                       hθij (x)θi′ j ′ (x′ )i =       2
                                                                Wiji′ j ′ (x, x′ )F (p, α, β)−1,   (3.85)
                                                    N       p=2

                         (p)
where the bitensor Wiji′ j ′ (x, x′ ) is defined as
                                      (p)                               (p)       (p)
                                   Wiji′ j ′ (x, x′ ) =               Hij (x)Hi′ j ′ (x′ ),
                                                            X
                                                                                                   (3.86)
                                                          k,l,m,...

with the sum running over all the suppressed labels k, l, m, . . . of the tensor harmonics on the
four sphere.


4     Analytic structure of propagators
4.1     Flat space limit
Before analyzing our correlation functions we shall consider the analagous functions in flat
space. This will allow us to constrain the allowed values of the parameters α and β, which will
be important when we return to the de Sitter case.
   Recall that in equations 3.75, 3.76 and 3.79, the radius R is arbitrary. To avoid confusion,
we shall now denote this arbitrary radius by R̃ to distinguish it from the on-shell value R, given
by equation 2.19. We can recover flat space results by taking R̃ → ∞. Before taking this limit,
we first replace the dimensionless momentum p with the dimensionful momentum k = p/R̃.
   There is no conformal anomaly in flat space and the scalar ψ corresponds to a conformal
transformation. Therefore, the only matter contribution to the scalar propagator comes from
the term in the Yang-Mills action that breaks the conformal invariance, namely the finite counter
term Sct . The other contribution to the scalar correlator comes from the Einstein-Hilbert action.
One obtains
                                                     1         1
                                hψ(x)ψ(x′ )i ∝     2      2
                                                            −      ,                         (4.1)
                                                −∂ + M        −∂ 2
with a positive constant of proportionality. M 2 is given by
                                                                   1
                                                     M2 = −           ,                             (4.2)
                                                                  αR2
where R is given by equation 2.19, although we emphasize that we are now working in flat
space. The second term in the propagator describes a massless scalar ghost. This can be dealt
with by gauge fixing the action. The first term is more worrying. If α > 0 then it describes a
tachyon. We regard this as undesirable: we do not want flat space to be an unstable solution
of our theory. We shall therefore always take α < 0, which gives a massive scalar in flat space.
    For the tensor propagator, the limit R̃ → ∞ makes the coefficient of the third counterterm
S3 diverge. To cancel this divergence, introduce a length scale ρ defined by
                                                     β = log(ρ/R̃).                                 (4.3)

                                                             22
The R̃ dependence in the coefficient of the third counterterm then drops out, leaving a finite
coefficient depending on the renormalization scale ρ. The R̃ → ∞ limit of the propagator is
similarly well-defined. The result is proportional to
                                                   1
                                                                         ,                     (4.4)
                                 k 2 {1 + R2 k 2 [1 + log(k 2 ρ2 /4)]}
Our propagator is of exactly the same form as given by Tomboulis [22] in his analysis of the
effects of large N matter on the flat space graviton propagator. The propagator is defined for
k 2 > 0. It can be analytically continued into the complex k 2 plane by taking a branch cut
for the logarithm along the negative real axis. There are generally two poles present, with
positions dependent on ρ. If ρ < 2R/e then these poles are on the positive real axis. One has
positive residue and the other negative residue, so they correspond to a tachyon and a ghost.
As ρ → 2R/e, the two poles move together and merge to form a double pole. For ρ > 2R/e,
this double pole splits into a pair of complex conjugate poles which move off into the complex
k 2 plane. The modulus r and phase θ of k 2 at these poles are related by
                                                   sin θ
                                              r=         .                                     (4.5)
                                                   R2 θ
θ is given by solving
                                                   ρ2
                                                                             !
                                                              sin θ
                              θ cot θ = − 1 + log     2
                                                        + log       ,                          (4.6)
                                                  4R            θ
which is straightforward to analyze graphically. The solution obeys θ → ±π and r → 0 as
ρ → ∞.
   The presence of tachyons for small ρ was not mentioned by Tomboulis since he implicitly
assumed ρ ≫ R. Since we want flat space to be a stable solution of our theory, we shall take
ρ > 2R/e when we consider the propagator in de Sitter space. This corresponds to taking
β > log 2 − 1.
   It is interesting to note that changing ρ changes the coefficient of the third counter term
S3 by a finite amount. This corresponds to introducing a finite counter term involving the
Euler number and the square of the Weyl tensor. The former is left unchanged by metric
perturbations. However, the latter is known to give rise to spin-2 ghosts in a pure gravity
theory. Such ghosts do not appear in our model: coupling to the CFT removes them.

4.2    Scalar propagator on the sphere
Equation 3.83 is the propagator of scalar metric perturbations on a spherical instanton supported
by the conformal anomaly of the CFT. The first term in the propagator describes a particle
with physical mass-squared m2 /R2 = (2αR2 )−1 . Since we are assuming α < 0, we have m2 < 0
so this particle is a tachyon. This is good because we do not want the spherical solution to be
stable since that would lead to a Lorentzian de Sitter solution in which inflation never ends.
Making α more negative makes the tachyon mass squared less negative, and therefore makes
the instability weaker. This suggests that if α is sufficiently negative then inflation will last for
a long time. We shall make this more precise later.
    The second term in the propagator describes a ghost. This is the normal scalar mode of
gravity that is canceled by the scalar parts of the Fadeev-Popov ghosts [26]. These ghosts supply

                                                   23
                                ˆ 2 + 4) factor in the scalar action. The propagator can then
a determinant that cancels the (∇
be read off from the action:
                                               32π 2 R4  ˆ 2    2 −1
                                                                  
                              hψ(x)ψ(x′ )i =             −∇   + m     .                         (4.7)
                                               3|α|N 2
This propagator can be written in momentum space as
                                                       ∞
                                              32π 2 R4 X  W (p) (µ(x, x′ ))
                            hψ(x)ψ(x′ )i =                                  ,                   (4.8)
                                              3|α|N 2 p=0 p(p + 3) + m2

where the biscalar W (p) is a function of the geodesic distance µ between x and x′ , given by

                               W (p) (µ(x, x′ )) =           H (p) (x)H (p) (x′ ),
                                                     X
                                                                                                (4.9)
                                                     k,l,m


where H (p) denote spherical harmonics on the four sphere and the sum runs over the suppressed
eigenvalues k, l, m.
    Notice that there are many negative modes if α is negative and close to zero. However,
if α < −1/8 then only the homogenous (p = 0) negative mode remains. To compute the
primordial density fluctuations in the microwave background radiation we are interested in the
two-point function with the homogenous mode projected out [37]. Notice also that the Fadeev-
Popov ghosts fix the residual gauge ambiguity associated with the p = 1 modes. These modes
no longer have zero action and therefore cannot be regarded as gauge.

4.3    Tensor propagator on the sphere
The tensor propagator (equation 3.85) has an interesting analytic structure. The momentum
space propagator is proportional to F (p, α, β)−1, where F is given by equation 3.82.
    For a physical interpretation, we need to study the behaviour of F in the complex λp plane,
where λp = p(p + 3) − 2 is the eigenvalue of −∇    ˆ 2 . We must therefore first write the propagator
as a function of λp . Since                         s
                                               3        17
                                          p=− ±            + λp ,                               (4.10)
                                               2         4
we must choose a branch for the square root. The Euclidean propagator is defined as a sum
over p = 2, 3, . . ., for which λp is positive. We must therefore take the positive sign for the
square root. The analytic continuation into the complex λp plane is given by taking a branch
cut along the negative axis for λp < −17/4. p has positive imaginary part just above the cut
and negative imaginary part just below the cut. Note that Re(p) ≥ −3/2. The branch cut
corresponds to a continuum of multi-particle states. The imaginary part of the propagator is
discontinuous across the cut. In general, the absence of negative norm states implies that the
imaginary part of the propagator just below the cut minus the imaginary part just above the
cut should be positive, which is indeed the case for our tensor propagator.
    It is also possible for the tensor propagator to have discrete poles in the λp plane. Poles on the
real axis are of particular importance. If such a pole occurs at positive λp then it corresponds
to a tachyon. In fact, since the graviton in de Sitter space has an equation of motion with

                                                     24
      6.0


                                                     0.2

      4.0




                                                     0.1
      2.0




      0.0                                            0.0



       −1.5      −1.0     −0.5       0.0       0.5   −0.1               0.0                 0.1



Figure 2: Inverse propagator F (p, 0, 0) for −3/2 ≤ p ≤ 1/2 and −0.1 < p < 0.1. The graph
grows monotonically for p > 0. There are zeroes at p ≈ −1.48 (massive particle), p ≈ −0.054
(ghost) and p = 0 (massless graviton).

λp = −2, it seems appropriate to regard particles with λp > −2 as tachyons. If a pole on the
real axis has negative residue then it corresponds to a ghost.
    Our propagator always has a pole at λp = −2 (p = 0), corresponding to the massless
graviton in de Sitter space. Support for this interpretation comes from observing that transverse
traceless tensor harmonics have 5 degrees of freedom. However, the mode with p = 0 mixes
with transverse vector harmonics, which have 3 degrees of freedom. Thus the p = 0 mode has
3 gauge degrees of freedom, leaving 2 physical degrees of freedom, as appropriate for a massless
spin-2 particle.
    We shall start by considering the case α = β = 0, for which there are two other poles in our
propagator, one at p ≈ −1.48 and the other at p ≈ −0.054. The former has λp ≈ −17/4 (but is
not quite on the cut) and has positive residue, the latter has λp ≈ −2.16 and negative residue.
The behaviour of F (p, 0, 0) is plotted in figure 2. It is easy to show that signs of the residues
of F −1 with respect to λp are given by the slope of F as it passes through 0. The positions of
the poles are shown in figure 3. Changing the value of β (still with α = 0) changes the position
and nature of these poles. As β is made more positive, the pole with p ≈ −1.48 gets absorbed
into the branch cut and the ghost moves towards p = −1 (i.e. λp = −4). As β is made more
negative, the pole with p ≈ −1.48 moves towards p = −1 while the other pole moves to positive
p (i.e., λp > −2), with its residue changing sign as it crosses p = 0. This pole corresponds to a
tachyon. Recall that tachyons were also present in flat space for sufficiently negative β. In order
for tachyons to be absent in flat space, we had to choose β > log 2 − 1. We have roughly the
same restriction on β in order to avoid spin-2 tachyons in de Sitter space. We shall therefore
exclude the case β < log 2 − 1 as unphysical.
    Now consider the effect of turning on α < 0. This has no effect on the pole at λp = −2, so
the massless graviton remains. If β = 0, then the two other poles move together as α decreases
and eventually coalesce into a double pole. This splits into a pair of complex conjugate poles
that move off into the complex λp plane. For β > 0 then there is generally only one pole present
(in addition to the graviton pole) when α = 0. As α is decreased, an additional pole (with
positive residue) emerges from the branch point and moves towards the ghost pole, eventually
coalescing with it. This then splits into a pair of complex conjugate poles. If β < 0, then the

                                                25
                          01        01              0011         0101                01         01 01

Figure 3: Analytic structure of the tensor propagator in the complex λp plane when α = 0.
The dotted lines denote λp = −2. Poles on the real axis to the right of this line correspond to
tachyons. There is a branch cut at λp = −17/4 and the thick line represents the branch cut.
There is always a massless graviton pole at λp = −2. The diagram on the left is for β > 0,
when there is a single ghost pole. As β decreases, this pole moves to the right and another pole
emerges from the branch cut. This new pole corresponds to a massive particle and appears in
the second diagram, which is for β = 0. The final diagram is for β < 0, when the ghost pole
crosses through λp = −2 and becomes a tachyon.

two poles again move together, coalesce and then become a pair of complex conjugate poles.
In all cases, the effect of making α more negative is similar to the effect of increasing ρ in the
flat space propagator, i.e., pathologies such as ghosts and tachyons move off into the complex
plane. When β is large, the poles becomes complex for α < −β/8, so no fine tuning of the ratio
α/β is involved.

4.4     Complex poles
We have seen how ghost poles can be moved off the real axis, becoming a pair of complex
conjugate poles. The interpretation of such a pair of poles has been reviewed by Coleman [38].
The presence of complex conjugate poles with (complex) masses given        √ by m = a ± ib with
b > 0 implies causality violation at lengths or times of the order of 1/ b. For Tomboulis’ flat
space propagator, we have b ∼ R−1 , so one expects causality to be violated at a length scale
of the order of R, which is roughly N times the Planck length. Unless N is enormous, this is
far less than any scale probed by particle physics experiments so such causality violations are
unobservable9 , as noted by Tomboulis.
√ For −1 our de Sitter propagator, the complex poles again√  have b ∝ R−1 . If |α| is large then b ∝
  −αR , so causality violation occurs on a time scale R/ −α. If |α| is not large then causality
violation occurs on a time scale R. This is much smaller than scales probed in experiments,
but may have observational consequences in the CMB since R is the Hubble time, and therefore
the time scale for microphysics during inflation. However, we shall see in the next section that
observations suggest that |α| is of order 109 , so causality violation occurs on a time scale much
shorter than the Hubble time and is therefore completely unobservable.


   9
   In fact, these effects might be smaller than the effects of the gravitational field of subatomic particles, which
would also lead to modifications of causality through tilting of light cones.


                                                           26
5      Lorentzian two-point correlators
In this section we will show how the scalar and tensor propagators on the four sphere instanton
uniquely determine the primordial CMB perturbation spectrum in Lorentzian closed de Sit-
ter space. The two-point correlators in the Lorentzian region are obtained directly from the
Euclidean propagators by analytic continuation. We refer the reader for the details of this cal-
culation to our previous paper [24], where we described the analytic continuation of the graviton
correlator in a Randall-Sundrum version of the Starobinsky model. The techniques to perform
these calculations were developed in [39, 40].

5.1    Scalar propagator
We have the Euclidean correlator 4.8 as an infinite sum over real p, where p labels the level of
the four sphere scalar harmonics. Although this is a convenient labelling to study their analytic
structure, the eigenspace of the Laplacian on de Sitter space suggests that the Lorentzian
propagator is most naturally expressed in terms of an integral over real positive p′ = i(p + 3/2),
corresponding to scalar harmonics of the Lorentzian Laplacian with eigenvalue λp′ = (p′ 2 + 9/4).
We must therefore first analytically continue our result for the propagators into the complex
p-plane before continuing to Lorentzian signature. In terms of the label p′ , the Euclidean scalar
correlator 4.8 becomes

                                           32π 2 R4 +i∞
                                                                ′
                                                      X W (p ) (z(Ω, Ω′ ))
                                     ′
                           hψ(Ω)ψ(Ω )i = −                                 ,                   (5.1)
                                           3|α|N 2 p′ =5i/2 p′2 + 9/4 − m2

with
                       ′        5ip′ (p′2 + 1/4)
                   W (p ) (z) =           2
                                                               ′          ′
                                                 2 F1 (3/2 + ip , 3/2 − ip , 2, 1 − z)       (5.2)
                                       3π
and z = cos2 (µ/2). This biscalar is analytic in the upper half p′ -plane. The coefficient of the
biscalar is also analytic in the upper half plane apart from a simple pole at p′ = Λt , where
                                                 s
                                                     9
                                           Λt = i      − m2 .                                  (5.3)
                                                     4
This pole corresponds to the tachyon. Notice that the sum in equation 5.1 starts at p′ = 5i/2
because we have projected out the negative homogenous mode, which should be regarded as
part of the background [37].
    Knowing the analytic structure of the correlator, we are able to write the sum 5.1 as an
integral along a contour C1 encircling the points p′ = 5i/2, 7i/2, ..ni/2, where n tends to infinity.
This yields
                                                                      (p′ )
                                        16iπ 2 R4                ′
                                                        ′ (tanh p π)W       (µ)
                                                  Z
                                  ′
                       hψ(Ω)ψ(Ω )i =            2
                                                     dp                         .              (5.4)
                                         3|α|N C1           p + 9/4 − m2
                                                             ′2

The contour C1 can be distorted to run along the real p′ -axis. Apart from the tachyon pole,
we encounter two extra poles at p′ = 3i/2 and p′ = i/2 in the tanh p′ π factor. The p′ = 3i/2
pole corresponds to the negative homogenous mode that we have projected out in the Euclidean
correlator. On the other hand, W (i/2) (µ) = 0 so the pole at p′ = i/2 does not contribute to

                                                    27
the propagator. The contribution from the closing of the contour in the upper half p′ -plane
vanishes. Hence our final result for the Euclidean correlator reads
                                                   (p′ )
                16iπ 2 R4
                          "Z                                                               #
                                              ′
                                    ′ (tanh p π)W        (z) πi                        10i
                             +∞
           ′                                                               (Λt )
 hψ(Ω)ψ(Ω )i =                   dp                         − (tanh Λt π)W       (z) + 2 2 . (5.5)
                 3|α|N 2 −∞             p′2 + 9/4 − m2       Λt                       mπ
Finally one can rewrite 5.5 as an integral from 0 to ∞, over the eigenspace of the Lorentzian
Laplacian, and the two discrete contributions from the tachyon pole and the homogenous mode.
The tachyon contribution grows exponentially for timelike intervals. However, the relevant
propagator for computing the CMB anisotropies is the Feynman propagator, which should be
bounded both to the past and future. Therefore, the propagator that we have obtained by
analytic continuation from the four sphere does not obey the appropriate boundary conditions.
In order to obtain the two-point function that describes the correlations in the primordial density
fluctuation spectrum, we change the contour of integration so as to exclude the contribution
from the tachyon pole. We then obtain the Lorentzian Feynman scalar propagator,
                                                                              ′
                              32π 2 R4                    (tanh p′ π)W L(p ) (z(x, x′ ))
                                          "Z                                                            #
                                                 +∞                                        10
             hψ(x)ψ(x′ )i = −                         dp′                                + 2 2 .            (5.6)
                              3|α|N 2        0                 p + 9/4 − m
                                                                ′2              2         mπ
                                  ′                         ′                                               ′
The Lorentzian biscalar W L(p ) differs from W (p ) only by a factor of −i and (tanh p′ π)W L(p ) (z)
equals the sum of the degenerate scalar harmonics on closed de Sitter space with eigenvalue
λp′ = (p′2 + 9/4) of the Laplacian. For spacelike separations, we have z = cos2 (µ/2), where
µ(x, x′ ) is the geodesic distance between x and x′ . The correlator for timelike intervals is
obtained by setting ρ = π/2 − it, where ρ is the polar angle on the four sphere. For a purely
timelike separation, this gives z = cosh2 ((t − t′ )/2).

5.2     Tensor propagator
The principles of the continuation of the tensor propagator 3.85 are the same, but the calculation
is more complicated. We refer the interested reader to our previous paper [24] for the technical
details. The differences between [24] and the present paper are that we now have included the
effect of the finite R2 counterterm, we have kept β in the coefficient of the third counterterm
arbitrary and we now treat the discrete poles in the propagator more carefully.
                                                  (p′ )
    In [24] it was shown that the bitensor Wiji′ j ′ (µ) can be unambiguously extended as an
analytic function into the upper half p′ -plane. In addition, from subsection 4.3 we know that its
coefficient F (−ip′ −3/2, α, β)−1 is analytic, apart from a simple pole at p′ = 3i/2, corresponding
to the massless graviton in de Sitter space, and a pair of poles with complex masses Λ1 and
Λ2 = −Λ̄1 (we are assuming that α < −β/8 so that there are complex poles instead of a ghost).
These poles always occur in the upper half p′ -plane.
    Writing the sum in equation 3.85 as a contour integral yields
                                         64iπ 2 R4
                                                      Z
                              ′                                             (p′ )
               hθij (Ω)θi′ j ′ (Ω )i = −                    dp′ tanh p′ πW iji′ j ′ (z)G(p′ , α, β)−1       (5.7)
                                           N2          C1

where
        G(p′ , α, β) = F (−ip′ − 3/2, α, β)
                     = p′4 − 4ip′3 − p′2 /2 − 5ip′ − 3/16 + (p′2 + 9/4)[4α + (p′2 + 1/4) ×
                       (ψ(−ip′ /2 + 5/4) + ψ(−ip′ /2 + 7/4) − ψ(1) − ψ(2) + 2β)].

                                                          28
As we deform the contour towards the real axis we encounter, apart from the poles mentioned
above, two extra poles in the tanh p′ π factor. However, as explained in detail in [24], they do not
contribute to the tensor fluctuation spectrum. The contribution from the closing of the contour
in the upper half p′ -plane vanishes. Using G(−p̄′ , α, β) = Ḡ(p′ , α, β), one can again rewrite the
remaining integral over the real axis as an integral from 0 to ∞. The continuation of z(x, x′ )
for timelike intervals is the same as for the scalar two-point function. We then obtain for the
Lorentzian tensor propagator,

                                  128π 2 R4        +∞
                                                 Z
                         ′                                            L(p′ )
          hθij (x)θi′ j ′ (x )i =     2
                                                      dp′ (tanh p′ π)W iji′j ′ (z) ℜ(G(p′ , α, β)−1)
                                    N            0
                                                                          (Λ )
                                                           h                               io
                                  −πRiji′ j ′ (z) − 2πℜ (tanh Λ1 π)W iji1′ j ′ (z) R(Λ1 ) .                         (5.8)

                                  L(p′ )
In the integral, (tanh p′ π)W iji′ j ′ (z(x, x′ )) can be identified with the sum of the degenerate
rank-two tensor harmonics on closed de Sitter space with eigenvalue λp′ = (p′ 2 + 17/4) of the
Laplacian. The integrand vanishes as p′ → 0, so the correlator is well-behaved in the infrared.
   The first term in equation 5.8 represents the continuous tensor fluctuation spectrum. The
second term describes the massless graviton with Riji′j ′ (z) defined as the residue at p′ = 3i/2
of
                                             (p′ )        tanh p′ π
                                          W iji′ j ′ (z)              .                       (5.9)
                                                         G(p′ , α, β)
The third term in 5.8 is the combined contribution from the complex poles, with R(Λ1 ) denoting
the residue of G(p′ , α, β)−1 at p′ = Λ1 . For large |α| this mode grows exponentially, imply-
ing that the analytically continued propagator does not obey the boundary conditions for the
Feynman propagator. This can be remedied by changing the contour of integration to exclude
the contribution from the complex poles, giving the correct propagator for two-point tensor
correlations in the microwave background:

                            128π 2R4
                                       Z +∞                                                                    
                  ′                                          L(p′ )
    hθij (x)θi′ j ′ (x )i =                    dp (tanh p π)W iji′ j ′ (z) ℜ(G(p′ , α, β)−1) − πRiji′ j ′ (z)
                                                 ′         ′
                                                                                                                    .
                              N2        0
                                                                                              (5.10)
If |α| is large then the tensor propagator is proportional to (|α|N 2 )−1 . At large p′ the tensor
propagator behaves like (p′4 log p′ )−1 , just as the Euclidean correlator 3.85. This is in contrast
to the usual p′−2 behavior of the graviton propagator for de Sitter space with a cosmological
constant.


6     Observational constraints
6.1     Duration of inflation
The Starobinsky instability in four dimensions has been analyzed carefully by Vilenkin [17]. He
showed that the scale factor grows exponentially until
                                                          6H0
                                               t = t∗ ∼       (γ − 1),                                              (6.1)
                                                          M2


                                                          29
where, for our model, the parameters H0 and M are given by
                                                           √          −1
                               H0 = R−1 ,             M=        −2αR         .                 (6.2)

The parameter γ is related to the initial perturbation from the exact de Sitter solution
                                                  1
                                            γ=      log(2/δ0 ),                                (6.3)
                                                  2
where
                                                H0 − H
                                               δ0 =     ,                                      (6.4)
                                                   H0
is the perturbation of the Hubble parameter H = ȧ/a at time t = 0. If δ0 < 0 then the solution
eventually becomes singular [15], at least if one neglects spatial curvature (which should be a
good approximation if there is a lot of inflation). We shall therefore restrict ourselves to δ0 > 0.
    For t < t∗ , there is exponential growth with Hubble parameter H0 . The number of e-foldings
of inflation during this phase is therefore
                                                   6H02
                                           N1 =         (γ − 1).                               (6.5)
                                                   M2
For our values of H0 and M, this gives

                                           N1 = −12α(γ − 1).                                   (6.6)

   For t > t∗ , there is a phase of slow-roll inflation in which the Hubble parameter changes
from H0 to M. The number of e-foldings of inflation during this phase is [17]

                                 N2 = −12α log cosh 1 ≈ −2.26α.                                (6.7)

The slow-roll phase lasts until t ∼ 6γH0 /M 2 . Once this phase ends, the universe enters a matter
dominated era in which the scale factor behaves as [15, 17]
                                                   2
                                                                                
                                     2/3
                            a(t) ∝ t           1+     sin Mt + O(t−2 ) .                       (6.8)
                                                  3Mt
The oscillations in the scale factor can drive particle production and reheating.
    Vilenkin used the Wheeler-DeWitt equation to obtain an estimate for δ0 . Using his results,
we obtain
                                     1
                             δ0 ∼ √ ,         N1 = −12α(log N − 1).                           (6.9)
                                     2N
Quantum cosmology therefore predicts γ ≫ 1. So far, the only restriction on N is that N must
be large enough for our AdS/CFT calculation to be valid. This implies that log N is not close
to 1, so taking α < −5 makes N1 sufficiently large to solve the horizon and flatness problems.
    Our correlation functions for metric perturbations were calculated assuming a four sphere
(or de Sitter) background. The present day horizon size left the horizon about fifty e-folds before
the end of inflation. Hence the long-wavelength temperature fluctuations in the microwave sky
carry the imprint of the first expansion phase provided N2 < 50, which is true if α > −20.
Because our correlation functions for metric perturbations were calculated assuming a four

                                                      30
sphere (or de Sitter) background, the predicted spectrum can then be directly compared with
observation. However, our results will be modified for modes that left the horizon during the
slow-roll phase, when the background is not exactly de Sitter. Therefore, if α ≤ −20 then it
would be necessary to do a calculation based on an scalar/vector/tensor decomposition on the
three sphere in order to enable us to evolve the spectrum through the instability and predict in
detail the CMB fluctuation spectrum.

6.2     Amplitude of perturbations
In order to compare our results with observations, we should first render the propagators di-
mensionless by dividing by R4 . The correlators are then functions of p divided by N 2 . Long
wavelength perturbations are insensitive to what happens after inflation, so these can be di-
rectly compared with observation. For the tensors, long wavelength perturbations correspond
to modes on the four sphere10 with p = 2. The amplitude of the fluctuations can be obtained
from the correlator:                                       !1/2
                                                     2
                                               128π
                                θij /R2 ∼                       .                       (6.10)
                                           N 2 F (2, α, β)
In order to agree with observations this should not exceed 10−5 , which requires

                                      N 2 (250 + 240β − 40α) > 1013 .                                    (6.11)

Since we are assuming N is large, the obvious way to satisfy this inequality is to take N =
O(105 ). However, this implies that the number of fields present is 11N 2 = O(1011 ), which
seems to contradict present day observations11 . Instead, we could take N 2 β to be of order
4 × 1010 or N 2 |α| to be of order 2 × 1011 . The former corresponds to taking the coefficient of
the Weyl squared term in the action to be of order 107 and the latter corresponds to taking the
coefficient of the R2 counterterm to be of order 108 .
    Note that if we take β to be large then we would also have to take α to be large in order
to avoid ghosts in the tensor propagator. Therefore the most natural choice is probably to
take just α to be large. Note that suppression of tensor perturbations through a Weyl squared
counterterm (i.e. taking β large) was not mentioned in [15, 17] since this counterterm does not
affect the coefficients a, c, d in the trace anomaly.
    Turning to the scalar perturbations, we see that these can also be suppressed by taking
  2
N |α| to be large. Changing β does not affect the scalars. Our scalar correlator suggests that
taking N 2 |α| to be of order 2 × 1011 should bring the scalar perturbations within observational
bounds.
    We conclude that if N 2 |α| is of order 2 × 1011 then we can bring metric perturbations within
the observational bounds. N just has to be large enough to justify the large N approximation
for the matter fields. For example, we could take N = 10 and α = −2 × 109 . However, such a
large value for α implies that all modes that we observe today must have left the horizon during
  10
       We should really be studying the Lorentzian correlators here. However, the overall amplitude of the
Lorentzian and Euclidean propagators is the same.
   11
      However, it is possible that these fields may have masses large compared to the scale probed in colliders,
i.e., m ≫ 1 TeV, but small compared with the scale at which inflation takes place, m ≪ 10−5 mpl . Such fields
would be effectively massless during inflation but unobservable today.


                                                      31
the slow-roll phase of inflation. Our results for the two-point correlators will be modified in
this case, since we assumed a four sphere background in our calculation. However, it is usually
the case that the amplitude of perturbations is inversely proportional to the horizon radius at
which they left the horizon. The horizon radius increases during slow-roll so it seems likely that
if |α| is very large the amplitude of perturbations will be smaller than the amplitude obtained
above. This argument is confirmed by the estimates of Vilenkin [17]. We conclude that taking
N 2 |α| ≈ 2 × 1011 will bring the perturbations within observational bounds, and a far smaller
value may in fact be sufficient.
     A coefficient of order 108 in the action is large, but this is essentially the same fine-tuning
problem that also appears in all scalar field models of inflation. In these scenarios, matching
the amplitude of perturbations to COBE typically requires a fine-tuned parameter in the action
of O(10−12 ).
     Note that taking |α| to be very large implies that causality violations during inflation occur
on a time scale much shorter than the Hubble time, so they would not have had a significant
effect on microphysics. One might worry that taking |α| to be large would imply significant
deviations from Einstein gravity today, arising from the higher derivative R2 term in the action.
In flat space, the only effect of this term is to introduce a scalar field with mass given by equation
4.2. If we take N = 10 and |α| of order 109 then this scalar has mass M ≈ 10−6 mpl , which is
far too massive to be observed nowadays.


7      Short distance physics
7.1     Introduction
The observational constraints that we have derived do not depend on the detailed structure
of our propagators and could be obtained directly from the work of Starobinsky and Vilenkin.
In this section we shall consider a new phenomenon revealed by our propagators, namely the
suppression of short distance metric perturbations by matter fields. This suppression is evident
in Tomboulis’ flat space propagator 4.4, which falls off as (k 4 log k 2 )−1 for large momentum k.
It is also present in our tensor propagator12 , equation 3.85, which falls off as (p4 log p)−1 at
large p. This behaviour has not been discussed in previous studies of the Starobinsky model
because these have neglected the non-local part of the matter effective action.
    Inflation acts as a “cosmic magnifying glass” by blowing up microscopic physics to macro-
scopic scales. It is often assumed that this might lead to some characteristic signature in the
CMB of new physics at short distances, e.g., extra dimensions. Our results appear to contradict
this inflationary dogma, because they show that at small scales, matter fields will completely
drown out the effects of any new gravitational physics. In this section we shall illustrate this
phenomenon by comparing our results with the results for a model with an extra dimension,
namely the Randall-Sundrum (RS) [23] version of the Starobinsky model.

  12
     Once again, we shall concentrate on the Euclidean propagators in the section. The Lorentzian propagators
exhibit similar short distance behaviour.




                                                     32
7.2       Randall-Sundrum model
The RS model consists of a five dimensional spacetime with negative cosmological constant, and
a thin positive tension domain wall whose tension is fine tuned to cancel the effect of the bulk
cosmological constant. The ground state solution of this model is a Poincaré symmetric domain
wall separating two regions of AdS. In the RS version of the Starobinsky model, we simply add
a U(N) Yang-Mills theory to the worldvolume of the domain wall. This model was extensively
discussed in our previous paper [24]. For related work, see [41, 42, 43, 44]. The (Euclidean)
action is
                                      S = Sbulk + Sbrane ,                                  (7.1)
where
                                    1
                                          Z
                                            √
                                                
                                                      12
                                                         
                                                               1
                                                                  Z      √
                      Sbulk = −         d5 x g R + 2 −               d4 x h[K]+−,             (7.2)
                                  16πG5               l      8πG5
                                              3
                                                   Z     √
                                 Sbrane =            d4 x h + W [h],                          (7.3)
                                            4πG5 l
where gµν denotes the five dimensional bulk metric and hij the metric induced on the domain
wall, l is the radius of the AdS solution, W is the generating functional of the Yang-Mills theory
on the domain wall and [K]+   − is the discontinuity in the trace of the extrinsic curvature at the
              13
domain wall .
   There are two simple solutions of the equations of motion for this model. Since the trace
anomaly vanishes in flat space, a Poincaré symmetric solution still exists. However, on a domain
wall with de Sitter geometry, the trace anomaly acts like an extra contribution to the tension
which permits a self-consistent de Sitter solution to the equations of motion. The Euclidean
version of this is a spherical domain wall separating two balls of AdS. The radius R of the
domain wall is given by [24]            s
                                    R3 R2            N 2 G5 R 4
                                              +  1 =       + 4.                               (7.4)
                                     l3    l2         8πl3    l
The metric in each bulk region is pure AdS:

                                          ds2 = l2 (dy 2 + sinh2 ydΩ24 ),                     (7.5)

for 0 ≤ y < y0 . The domain wall at y = y0 , where y0 is given by R = l sinh y0 .
    The RS model can be interpreted using the AdS/CFT correspondence as four dimensional
gravity coupled to a Yang-Mills theory with an ultraviolet cut-off [46, 24]. The Yang-Mills
theory is two copies of the N = 4 U(NRS ) super Yang-Mills theory with NRS given by

                                                   l3     2
                                                        2NRS
                                                      =      .                                (7.6)
                                                   G5    π
We shall refer to this dual Yang-Mills theory as the RS CFT in order to distinguish it from
the theory on the domain wall. The Newton constant in four dimensions is given by the RS
value G4 = G5 /l. The four dimensional dual of the RS model with a U(N) CFT on the domain
wall is four dimensional gravity coupled to both the RS CFT and the U(N) CFT. These two
CFTs are rather different in that the former has an ultraviolet cut-off (so its effective action
 13
      See [45] for an explanation of why this term is required.

                                                         33
does not behave as p4 log p at large p) whereas the latter does not. The effective action of the
                              2
RS CFT is proportional to NRS    , while the effective action of the other CFT is proportional to
  2
N . This implies that the effects of the RS CFT should be negligible when N ≫ NRS . This is
confirmed by expanding equation 7.4 in powers of N/NRS . At leading order, one recovers the
four dimensional result 2.19. Note that N ≫ NRS implies R ≫ l, i.e., the domain wall is large
compared with the AdS length scale.

7.3    Brane-world perturbations
The RS model is a short distance modification of gravity. For length scales much greater than
the AdS length l, four dimensional gravity is recovered. However, at shorter distances gravity
becomes five dimensional. One might expect this to lead to a characteristic signal in the CMB.
This turns out not to be true when the Yang-Mills theory is included on the domain wall.
The reason is simple: at short distances, the matter contribution to the graviton propagator
completely dominates the contribution from the four or five dimensional Einstein-Hilbert action.
One might think that this effect is peculiar to our model of anomaly driven inflation, and would
not occur in other models of inflation. However, any model has to take account of the Standard
Model, which contains a large number of fields. These matter fields will suppress small scale
metric perturbations in the same way as our Yang-Mills theory.
    We shall illustrate this effect explicitly by calculating the scalar and tensor graviton propa-
gators for anomaly driven inflation in the RS model. Our method will be the same as above, i.e.,
we shall calculate the propagators in Euclidean signature and analytically continue to Lorentzian
signature. The initial quantum state of perturbations is defined by the boundary condition of
regularity on the Euclidean solution. In the RS case, this condition of regularity extends into
the bulk.
    This work is an extension of our previous paper [24], which contained the first rigorous
derivation of cosmological perturbations in RS cosmology. However, in that paper we only
discussed tensor perturbations and did not include the finite R2 counterterm. Here, we shall
include this counterterm and also consider scalar perturbations. Our method involves integrat-
ing out metric perturbations in the fifth dimension. For alternative approaches to brane-world
cosmological perturbations, see [47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52].
    The metric perturbation on the domain wall can be decomposed as in subsection 3.1, giving
a scalar ψ(x) and a tensor θij (x). Correlation functions of these quantities can be calculated
by integrating out the bulk metric perturbation, as explained in [24]. This is done by splitting
the bulk metric perturbation δg into a classical part δg0 and a quantum part δg′ . The classical
part is the solution of the linearized Einstein equation in the bulk that is regular throughout the
bulk and matches onto the metric perturbation at the domain wall. The quantum part vanishes
at the domain wall. Performing the path integral over δg′ gives some determinant Z0 that we
shall not worry about. The classical part simply contributes the bulk action evaluated on shell:
                                Z
                                    d[δg]e−Sbulk [δg] = Z0 e−Sbulk [δg0 ] .                   (7.7)

We conclude that the effective action governing metric perturbations on the domain wall is

                                    Sef f = 2Sbulk [δg0 ] + Sbrane .                          (7.8)

                                                    34
The factor of 2 is necessary if we regard Sbulk as the action of just one of the bulk regions.
Sbrane is straightforward to compute using our result for W , equation 3.73. The bulk metric
perturbation δg0 can be obtained from the results of section 3 by replacing ¯l and Ḡ by l and
G5 . It follows that the bulk metric perturbation is transverse traceless, and the scalar ψ arises
from a perturbation in the position of the domain wall in Gaussian normal coordinates. Sbulk
can be obtained from equations 3.69, 3.70 and 3.71 since the bulk action in the RS model is
exactly the same as the bulk action for the AdS/CFT correspondence.
    From Sef f one can read off the metric propagators. The Euclidean scalar correlator can be
written in position space as

                                        32π 2 R4
                                                                     "                              #
                                   ′                    1        1
                      hψ(x)ψ(x )i =                          −        ,                                   (7.9)
                                      2          2   ˆ 2 + m2 −∇
                                    3N (−α)(4 + m ) −∇         ˆ2 − 4

where
                                                                1 + 2e−2y0
                                                                             !
                                                    1
                                                    2
                                               m =                               .                       (7.10)
                                                   2α           1 + e−2y0
The tensor correlator is
                                                              ∞
                                                   128π 2 R4 X     (p)
                        hθij (x)θi′ j ′ (x′ )i =       2
                                                                 Wiji′ j ′ (x, x′ )F (p, y0 , ρ, α)−1,   (7.11)
                                                     N       p=2

where
                                                    f ′ (y0 )
                                                                                            !
                      F (p, y0 , α, β) = e sinh y0 p
                                                   y0
                                                              + 4 coth y0 − 6 + Ψ(p)
                                                    fp (y0 )
                                       + 2βp(p + 1)(p + 2)(p + 3) − 4αp(p + 3).                          (7.12)

Recall that y0 is defined by R = l sinh y0 . We have used equation 7.4 to write l3 /G5 in terms
of R. fp is defined in equation 3.56. Equation 7.12 was derived in [24] but the term involving
α was not included. In comparing our propagators in the RS model with those of the four
dimensional model, we first render them dimensionless by dividing by R4 .
    The scalar correlator for the RS model is very similar to that of the four dimensional model,
as given by equation 3.83. The only difference is the y0 -dependence of the tachyon mass m2 .
As y0 → ∞, the four dimensional value is recovered. This is to be expected since, in this limit,
R/l → ∞, which implies N/NRS → ∞ using equation 7.4. We have already discussed how the
RS corrections are expected to be negligible when N ≫ NRS . Note that as y0 increases from 0
to ∞, m2 just changes monotonically by a factor of 2/3.
    The analytic structure of the RS tensor propagator is very similar to the four dimensional
case. There is always a pole at p = 0: this is the massless graviton of the RS model14 . Other
poles behave as discussed in subsection 4.3.
    The tensor propagator appears to exhibit more interesting dependence on y0 . The first term
in equation 7.12 arises from the gravitational part of the action, so this is where differences
between a RS model and the four dimensional model show up. As y0 → ∞, the first term tends
to p2 + 3p + 6, in agreement with the four dimensional result (equation 3.82). For very small y0 ,
 14
      This pole was mistakenly identified as gauge in [24].


                                                               35
                       25



                       20




                       15



                       10




                        5




                        0



                       −5
                            −1.5   −1.0     −0.5        0.0        0.5       1.0



Figure 4: F (p, y0, 0, 0) plotted against p. The lower curve on the left (upper curve on the right)
is for R ≫ l, when four dimensional gravity is recovered. The other curve is for R = l, when
the RS corrections might be expected to be large. However, they clearly have very little effect.

the first term is p + 6. If y0 is held fixed but large then the first term grows quadratically with p
as p is increased but eventually becomes linear for sufficiently large p, corresponding to gravity
becoming five dimensional at short distances. Thus the difference between a RS model and four
dimensional gravity might be expected to show up in 1/p behaviour in the tensor propagator at
large p, rather than the usual 1/p2 behaviour. However, this neglects the effects of the matter
fields, which are given by the other terms in equation 7.12. At large p, Ψ(p) grows like p4 log p
and completely dominates the first term. Therefore, at large p the tensor propagator behaves like
(p4 log p)−1 irrespective of whether one is considering a RS model or four dimensional gravity.
The differences between the RS model and four dimensional gravity are drowned out by the
damping effect of matter fields at short distances, rendering them unobservable.
    RS corrections are expected to be important at distances of order l. If we take R = l then
all the tensor harmonics have wavelengths smaller than l, not just the large p ones. Therefore,
one might expect RS corrections to be important at small p for such a small domain wall.
Surprisingly, this turns out not to be the case, as shown in figure 4. This surprising behaviour
can be understood in the four dimensional dual picture. Taking R = l corresponds to N 2 ≈
      2
6.4NRS   , so the matter on the domain wall still dominates the effect of the RS corrections. The
RS corrections would be expected to be about as important as the matter on the wall when
NRS ≈ N, which corresponds to R ≈ 0.46l. In other words, the RS corrections only become
large when the entire domain wall is smaller than the AdS radius.
    One might worry that introducing a cut-off into the matter theory would spoil the damping
at large p. However, if we did have a momentum cut-off Λ then we would need ΛR ≫ 1 in order
for field theory to be valid during inflation, as is always assumed. It therefore seems appropriate
to take Λ ∼ mpl , which corresponds to pmax ∼ N ≫ 1. Figure 4 shows that the matter fields
dominate the propagator even for quite small p, so introducing a cut-off would have little effect.



                                                   36
8       Conclusions
There is now good observational evidence suggesting that the early universe underwent a period
of inflationary expansion. Most theoretical models of inflation involve a scalar field rolling down
its potential. The simplicity of such models is attractive but they have several serious problems.
All these models require contrived initial conditions – no explanation is given of why the scalar
field was initially displaced from the minimum of its potential15 . Secondly, in order to obtain
sufficient inflation and small CMB fluctuations, the CMB potential has to be highly fine-tuned.
Finally, models of scalar field driven inflation usually disregard the effect of the large number
of other fields in the universe. It is usually argued that the effect of such fields rapidly becomes
negligible during inflation. However, as we have seen, this is not necessarily true because the
trace anomaly of matter fields provides an additional contribution to the cosmological constant
constant during inflation.
    In this paper, we have argued in favour of Starobinsky’s model of trace anomaly driven
inflation [15] as an alternative to scalar field driven inflation. In Starobinsky’s model, the trace
anomaly supports a de Sitter phase of expansion which is unstable, but can be long lived. This
model is better motivated from the point of view of initial conditions since quantum cosmology
predicts that the de Sitter universe can nucleate semi-classically via a four sphere instanton [17].
We have seen that this model admits a second instanton. This can probably be interpreted in a
similar way to the Coleman-de Luccia [53] instanton, i.e., as describing the semi-classical decay
of the de Sitter phase via nucleation of a pair of bubbles, each containing an open inflationary
universe. Owing to the lack of an analytic solution for this instanton, we have concentrated on
the four sphere instanton in this paper.
    During the de Sitter phase, particle masses would have been small compared with the space-
time curvature so matter fields would have been classically conformally invariant. Moreover, we
observe a large number of fields today and supersymmetry predicts that there should be many
more, so the large N approximation is justified in studies of trace anomaly driven inflation. This
leads to a very attractive way of calculating the effective action of matter fields during the de
Sitter phase, viz the AdS/CFT correspondence. Using AdS/CFT, we have presented the first
calculation of scalar and tensor metric propagators for trace anomaly driven inflation, taking
full account of the back-reaction of matter fields.
    In order for the de Sitter phase to be unstable, it is necessary for the coefficient d =
αN 2 /(16π 2) of the ∇2 R term in the trace anomaly to be negative (in our conventions). We
therefore included a R2 counterterm in the action to control this coefficient. We also took
account of the other curvature squared counterterms. We demonstrated that the amplitude
of long wavelength metric perturbations could be brought within observational bounds at the
expense of fine-tuning of N 2 |α|. This fine-tuning is no worse than required in scalar field driven
inflation, and agrees with the results of Vilenkin [17]. In fact, the amount of tuning required may
be much less than for scalar field driven inflation. A more detailed treatment of the slow-roll
phase would be required to verify this.
    One might worry that introducing a R2 counterterm into the action would lead to observa-
tional consequences for, say, solar system physics. However, the√     effect of this term in flat space
is just to introduce a scalar field whose mass is of order mpl /(N −α). Even though |α| is very
  15
       Quantum cosmology can answer this question, but only for very contrived false-vacuum potentials [53, 54].



                                                       37
large, this mass is still much too large to lead to observable effects today. For example, taking
N = 10 and α of order 109 gives a mass of order 10−6 mpl .
    Our tensor propagator exhibits interesting analytic structure. We have shown that ghosts
can be removed without fine-tuning, although this introduces a pair of complex conjugate poles.
Such poles were studied long ago and found to correspond √     to violations of causality. We have
seem that this causality violation occurs on a time scale R/ −α, where R is the Hubble time.
This time scale is much smaller than R when |α| is large enough to bring the amplitude of
metric perturbations within the observational bound16 .
    At large p, the tensor propagator exhibits the behaviour first discovered for flat space by
Tomboulis [22], namely suppression of metric perturbations by matter fields. This suppression
does not involve fine-tuning, as required for suppression of long-wavelength perturbations. The
matter fields make the tensor propagator decay like (p4 log p)−1 at large wavenumber p. This
behaviour would be expected whenever the large N expansion is valid. Since we observe a large
number of matter fields, we have argued that this suppression should occur even if inflation
were not driven by a trace anomaly. This implies that matter fields damp out the effects of any
short distance modifications of gravity (such as extra dimensions), rendering them unobservable.
We illustrated this effect by comparing the propagators for trace anomaly driven inflation in
four dimensions and in a Randall-Sundrum model. At large p, the tensor propagators are
indistinguishable and at small p they only differ when the entire domain wall is smaller than
the radius of curvature of the fifth dimension.
    There are many directions in which our work could be extended. For example, our use of
AdS/CFT has restricted us to a strongly coupled theory. However, we have argued that our 2-
point functions are independent of the Yang-Mills coupling. Dependence on the coupling would
be expected to show up in higher order correlation functions of metric perturbations. This
implies that these higher order correlation functions would not be determined by the 2-point
functions, so the spectrum of CMB fluctuations would exhibit non-Gaussianity.
    In the Einstein static universe, the strongly coupled Yang-Mills theory exhibits a confine-
ment/ de-confinement transition at a certain temperature, corresponding to two different bulk
solutions in the AdS/CFT correspondence [31]. One might therefore wonder whether there is a
bulk solution different from pure AdS which could have a spherical boundary with an O(4) sym-
metric metric. If so, then one might have a phase transition in a cosmological background. This
does not appear possible. To see this, assume that the O(4) isometry group of the boundary
implies a corresponding O(4) isometry group in the bulk (we are thinking of a cut-off CFT, cor-
responding to a finite boundary). Birkhoff’s theorem then implies that the bulk is (Euclidean)
Schwarzschild-AdS. However, in order for the instanton to have spherical topology, the orbits
of the O(4) group have to degenerate at two points on the instanton (the poles) and this is not
possible if the bulk is Schwarzschild-AdS except when the mass parameter vanishes. In other
words, there is a unique solution (pure AdS) in the bulk and therefore no phase transition. This
bulk solution corresponds to a deconfined phase of the Yang-Mills theory (this is evident from
the overall N 2 factor in the Yang-Mills effective action).
    When one has a choice between several cosmological instantons, one usually argues that the
instanton with the least Euclidean action is preferred, on the basis that this instanton would give
  16
    Even if the time scale for causality violation were the Hubble time, it is not clear that this would contradict
cosmological observations and such violations would certainly not be observable in the laboratory.



                                                        38
the dominant contribution to a gravitational path integral. Instantons which are saddle points,
rather than local minima of the action, would not be viewed as satisfactory. These instantons
would possess negative modes, corresponding to directions in field space along which the action
decreases. Such instantons have been extensively discussed in [55], where it was argued that
they may be interpreted as describing quantum tunneling in an existing universe, rather than
creation of a universe from nothing. Since we have found two instantons, it would be interesting
to examine whether they have negative modes. This could give support to the idea that the
double bubble instanton describes an instability of the de Sitter vacuum.
    Any discussion of negative modes presupposes the existence of a gravitational path integral.
This is not well-defined even for Einstein gravity since it is well-known that the Euclidean
gravitational action is unbounded below. In our case, the presence of the R2 counterterm with
a negative coefficient appears to make matters even worse. However, it is known that Einstein
gravity coupled to a R2 term can be rewritten as Einstein gravity coupled to a scalar field [56]
so the situation is probably no worse than usual.
    We have emphasized that there are two instantons in the Starobinsky model. However, there
is also a third, namely flat space viewed as the infinite radius limit of the four sphere. This has
infinitely negative Euclidean action. It might therefore be necessary to invoke the anthropic
principle to explain why an inflationary universe is nucleated rather than an empty flat universe.
The situation is analagous to false vacuum decay [53, 54], for which the instanton describing
nucleation of a universe in the true vacuum state has lower action than the instanton describing
nucleation of a universe in the false vacuum state. Clearly there is plenty of scope for future
work on understanding the quantum cosmology of the Starobinsky model.
    Our approach was based on decomposing the metric perturbation into scalar, vector and
tensor representations of O(5), or O(4, 1). This made the AdS/CFT calculation relatively
straightforward, but means that our results are only directly applicable to the initial de Sitter
phase, although we have argued that the amplitude of metric perturbations should not increase
during the slow roll phase. In order to produce a detailed fluctuation spectrum that could be
compared with observation, it would be necessary to do a calculation based on a decomposi-
tion into scalar, vector and tensor represenations of O(4) (assuming a closed universe). If the
AdS/CFT calculation could be extended to perturbations around a Euclidean background with
a general O(4) invariant metric then, by analytic continuation, one could calculate how the
metric propagators evolve during the slow-roll phase. The perturbations spectrum at the end of
inflation could then be used to predict the detailed spectrum of temperature fluctuations in the
CMB. An O(4) approach would also be necessary to investigate the double bubble instanton.

                                   Acknowledgments
  We are very grateful to Steven Gratton, Hugh Osborn and Neil Turok for useful discussions.
TH is Aspirant FWO, Belgium.


References
 [1] A.H. Guth, Phys. Rev. D23, 347 (1981).

 [2] P. de Bernardis et al., Nature 404, 955 (2000); astro-ph/0004404.


                                                39
 [3] A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B108, 389 (1982).

 [4] A. Albrecht and P.J. Steinhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1220 (1982).

 [5] G.F. Mazenko, W.G. Unruh, R.M. Wald, Phys. Rev. D31, 273 (1985).

 [6] A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B129, 177 (1983).

 [7] A.D. Linde, D. Linde, A. Mehzlumian, Phys. Rev. D54, 2504 (1996).

 [8] J.B. Hartle and S.W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. D28, 2960 (1983).

 [9] S.W. Hawking and N. Turok, Phys. Lett. B425, 25 (1998); hep-th/9802030.

[10] C. Bennett et al., Astrophys.J. 464, L1 (1996); astro-ph/9601067.

[11] D.M. Capper and M.J. Duff, Nuovo Cimento 23A, 173 (1974).

[12] N.D. Birrell and P.C.W. Davies, Quantum fields in curved space, Cambridge University
     Press (1982).

[13] M.J. Duff, Class. Quant. Grav. 11, 1387 (1994); hep-th/9308075.

[14] J.S. Dowker and R. Critchley, Phys. Rev. D13, 3224 (1976).

[15] A.A. Starobinsky, Phys. Lett. 91B, 99 (1980).

[16] M.V. Fischetti, J.B. Hartle and B.L. Hu, Phys. Rev. D20, 1757 (1979).

[17] A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D32, 2511 (1985).

[18] J.C. Fabris, A.M. Pelinson and I.L. Shapiro, hep-th/0009197.

[19] A.A. Starobinsky, JETP Lett. 34, 438 (1981).

[20] A.A. Starobinsky, Sov. Astron. Lett. 9, 302 (1983).

[21] J. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 231 (1998); hep-th/9711200.

[22] E. Tomboulis, Phys. Lett. 70B, 361 (1977).

[23] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4690 (1999); hep-th/9906064.

[24] S.W. Hawking, T. Hertog and H.S. Reall, Phys. Rev. D62, 043501 (2000); hep-th/0003052.

[25] M. Henningson and K. Skenderis, JHEP 9807, 023 (1998); hep-th/9806087.

[26] G.W. Gibbons and M.J. Perry, Nucl. Phys. B146, 90 (1978).

[27] H. Osborn and G.M. Shore, Nucl. Phys. B571, 287 (2000); hep-th/9909043.

[28] A. Higuchi, J. Math. Phys. 28 (7), 1553 (1987).


                                              40
[29] G.W. Gibbons and S.W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. D15, 2752 (1977).

[30] S.S. Gubser, I.R. Klebanov and A.M. Polyakov, Phys. Lett. B428, 105-114 (1998); hep-
     th/9802109.

[31] E. Witten, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 253 (1998); hep-th/9802150.

[32] A. Tseytlin and H. Liu, Nucl. Phys. B533, 88 (1998); hep-th/9804083.

[33] M. Henningson and K. Skenderis, Fortsch. Phys. 48, 125 (2000); hep-th/9812032.

[34] V. Balasubramanian and P. Kraus, Commun. Math. Phys. 208, 413 (1999); hep-th/9902121.

[35] R. Emparan, C.V. Johnson and R.C. Myers, Phys. Rev. D60, 104001 (1999); hep-
     th/9903238.

[36] P. Kraus, F. Larsen and R. Siebelink, Nucl. Phys. B563, 259 (1999); hep-th/9906127.

[37] S.W. Hawking, Phys. Lett. 115B, 295 (1982).

[38] S. Coleman in Theory and phenomenology in particle physics, Ed. A. Zichichi, New York
     (1969).

[39] S. Gratton and N. Turok, Phys. Rev. D60, 123507 (1999); astro-ph/9902265.

[40] T. Hertog and N. Turok, astro-ph/9903075.

[41] S. Nojiri, S.D. Odintsov and S. Zerbini, Phys. Rev. D62, 064006 (2000); hep-th/0001192.

[42] S. Nojiri and S.D. Odintsov, Phys. Lett. B484, 119 (2000); hep-th/000497.

[43] S. Nojiri, O. Obregon and S.D. Odintsov, hep-th/0005127.

[44] L. Anchordoqui, C. Nunez and K. Olsen, hep-th/0007064.

[45] H.A. Chamblin and H.S. Reall, Nucl. Phys. B562, 133 (1999); hep-th/9903225.

[46] S.S. Gubser, hep-th/9912001.

[47] S. Mukohyama, hep-th/0004067.

[48] H. Kodama, A. Ishibashi and O. Seto, Phys. Rev. D62, 064022 (2000); hep-th/0004160.

[49] R. Maartens, hep-th/0004166.

[50] D. Langlois, hep-th/0005025.

[51] C. van de Bruck, M. Dorca, R. Brandenberger and A. Lukas, hep-th/0005032.

[52] K. Koyama and J. Soda, hep-th/0005239.

[53] S. Coleman and F. de Luccia, Phys. Rev. D21, 3305 (1980).


                                             41
[54] S.W. Hawking and I. Moss, Phys. Lett. B110, 35 (1982).

[55] S. Gratton and N. Turok, hep-th/0008235.

[56] B. Whitt, Phys. Lett. B145, 176 (1984).




                                               42
